MARRIAGES (GENERAL)
AN ORDINANCE TO CONSOLIDATE AND AMEND THE LAW RELATING TO
MARRIAGES OTHER THAN THE MARRIAGES OF MUSLIMS AND TO PROVIDE FOR
THE BETTER REGISTRATION THEREOF.
Ordinance Nos,
19 of 1907
27 of 1917
8 of 1922
18 of 1929
27 of 1931
15 of 1940
49 of 1944
20 of 1945
34 of 1946
47 of 1947
Law Nos, 41
of 1975
Act Nos,
22 of 1955
11 of 1963
3 of 1970
18 of 1995
12 of 1997
11 of 2001
38 of 2006
22 of 2013
Short title. 1. This Ordinance may be cited as the Marriage Registration Ordinance.
Appointment of 2.
Registrar-General
(1) There may be appointed a Registrar-General of Marriages for Sri
and his duties.
Lanka.
(2) The Registrar-General shall, subject to the directions of the
Minister, have the general control and superintendence of the
registration of marriages under the provisions of this Ordinance, and
of all persons appointed for or engaged in the carrying out of the
provisions of this Ordinance.
Appointment of 3.There may from time to time be appointed a fit and proper person or each
Assistant of two or more such persons to be or to act as an Assistant Registrar-
Registrars-General General of Marriages. Any person so appointed may exercise, perform
and their duties. [3, or discharge any power, duty or function expressly conferred or imposed
34 of 1946] upon the Assistant Registrar-General, and may subject to the directions of
the Minister and under the authority and control of the Registrar-General,
exercise, perform or discharge any power, duty or function conferred or
imposed upon the Registrar- General, by or under this Ordinance.
District Registrars. 4. (1) For each district there shall be a District Registrar of Marriages.
[8, 22 of 1955]
(2) The *(See section 4 of the Transfer of Powers (Divisional
[4, 34 of 1946]
Secretaries) Act, No. 58 of 1992.)Government Agent of a district
shall be the District Registrar for that district.
(3)* (See section 4 of the Transfer of Powers (Divisional
Secretaries) Act, No. 58 of 1992.)Every Additional Government
Agent, Assistant Government Agent, Additional Assistant
Government Agent and Office Assistant to a Government
Agent, of a district shall be an Additional District Registrar for
that district.
(4) Every Assistant Registrar-General shall be an Additional
District Registrar for the district of Colombo.
(5) There may be appointed any person as a District Registrar or
as an Additional District Registrar in addition to, or in place
of, any officer who is a District Registrar or an Additional
District Registrar by virtue of the preceding provisions of this
section.
(6) Every District Registrar shall have and may exercise within
his district the powers and duties vested by or under this
Ordinance in a registrar of a division, and shall superintend and
control, subject to the direction of the Registrar-General, the
registration of marriages within the district, and the registrars
hereinafter mentioned, and all other persons appointed for
or
engaged in carrying out the provisions of this Ordinance.
Establishment of 5.(1) The Minister may, by Notification in the Gazette, divide the several
registration districts of Sri Lanka into such and so many divisions for the purpose
divisions. of the registration of marriages as shall appear expedient, and may at
[8, 22 of 1955] any time by a like Notification amend, alter or abolish any such
[11, 34 of 1946] division.
(2) Every division which has been lawfully established at the
commencement of this Ordinance shall be deemed and taken to be a
division under the provisions of this Ordinance until such time as a
new division shall be constituted in lieu thereof under the provisions of
this Ordinance.
(3) Every reference to any revenue district in any Notification made
under subsection (1) of this section before the commencement of the
Administrative Districts Act shall, after the commencement of that Act,
be construed as a reference to the administrative district consisting
of the area which constituted that revenue district.
Appointment 6.(1) The Registrar-General may appoint one or more Persons to each
[2, 38 of 2006] such division, who shall be called Registrars of Marriages, and any
[11, 34 of 1946] such registrar at pleasure he may remove and appoint some other
person in his place, or in the place of any registrar who shall have died
or resigned office, or been granted leave of absence from his duties
Provided that in case of the death, sudden illness, or incapacity of the
registrar of a division, or in case of other emergency, it shall be lawful for
the Registrar-General or District Registrar, by writing under his hand, to
appoint a person to act as registrar for such division so however that
no such appointment shall be made by a District Registrar for any
period exceeding thirty days at any one time. Such acting appointment
shall be forthwith entered under the hand of the officer making the
appointment in a book to be kept for the purpose.
(2) A person shall be disqualified from being appointed or continuing
as a Registrar if he -
(a) becomes a Member of Parliament; or
(b) becomes a Member of a Provincial Council; or
(c) becomes a member of a Local Authority; or
(d) is holding any paid officer under the Republic; or
(e) is engaged in a profession that would prejudicially affect the
duties of a Registrar.
(3) Where any Registrar becomes disqualified from continuing as such
by virtue of subsection (2), the Registrar-General shall have the power
to remove such person from the post of Registrar with the approval of the
Minister by Order published in the Gazette and such removal shall take
effect on the date specified in such Order.
(4) In the event of a vacancy occurring in the post of Registrar as a
result of any resignation or any removal from office, any other person
shall, having regard to the provisions of this section, be appointed to
fill the vacancy.
Power to make 7.
rules.
(1) The Minister may from time to time make rules for the direction
[5, 34 of 1946] of the Registrar-General, the District Registrars, registrars,
ministers, and all persons whomsoever in the discharge of their
duties under this Ordinance, for all matters required by this
Ordinance to be prescribed, and generally for the effective carrying
out of the provisions of this Ordinance.
(2) No rule made under this section shall have effect until it is
approved by Parliament and notification of such approval is
published in the Gazette.
Residence, office, 8. (1) Every registrar shall dwell and have his office in such
and station of convenient place in his division as shall be appointed by the
registrar, District Registrar, and shall, if so directed by the District Registrar,
have within his division a station or stations as may be approved
[2, 20 of 1945]
by the District Registrar, and every such station shall, for the
purposes of the provisions of this Ordinance, with respect to the
attendance of persons and the registration of marriages at the
office of the registrar, be deemed to be his office :
Provided that the District Registrar may, in the special circumstances
of any case and with the prior approval of the Registrar-General,
authorize a registrar to dwell or to have his office or to have a station
at a place outside his division.
(2) The District Registrar shall forthwith notify to the Registrar-
General the places appointed by the District Registrar as the
residence, office, and station or stations for every registrar of his
district.
Attendance of 9. The registrar shall attend at his office and at each such station on such
registrar at his days and during such hours as shall respectively be appointed by the
office, District Registrar, and shall cause his name, with the addition of the
words 'Registrar of Marriages' with the name of the division, for which
he is registrar, and the days and hours of his attendance as appointed by
the District Registrar, to be placed in legible characters in the Sinhala,
Tamil and English languages in a conspicuous place on or near the
entrance of his office and station.
Registration of 10. (1) The minister, proprietor, or trustee of a building used as a place
place of worship of public Christian worship may apply to the Registrar- General
for solemnization that such building may be registered for solemnizing marriages
of marriage. therein.
(2) The application shall be in the form A in the First Schedule,
and shall contain a declaration signed by at least twenty
householders, and countersigned by the said minister,
proprietor, or trustee, that they frequent or intend to frequent
such place of worship.
(3) The Registrar-General may register such place of worship for
the solemnization of marriages in a book to be kept by him for
that purpose, and he shall thereupon give a certificate of such
registry and of the date thereof under his hand, which certificate
shall be in the form B in the First Schedule, and the Registrar-
General shall give public notice of such registry by
notification in the Gazette.
(4) No building shall be registered which is not used for public
Christian worship.
(5) Any building already registered at the time when this
Ordinance comes into operation shall be deemed to have been
registered under the provisions of this Ordinance.
Registration of 11. Where the population in any district is so scattered that it is difficult
such place if thinly to procure the signatures of twenty householders, it shall be lawful for
populated district. the Registrar-General to issue his certificate upon a declaration signed
by as many householders as live within convenient distance from the
building, and countersigned by the minister, proprietor, or trustee, and
upon such other evidence as the Registrar-General may require to satisfy
him that the building is used for public Christian worship.
Cancellation or 12. (1)If any building registered for the solemnization of marriages
substitution of shall at any subsequent period cease to be used for the
public
registration of Christian worship of the congregation on whose behalf it was
building. registered, the minister, proprietor, or trustee for the time being
of such building shall with all convenient speed notify the fact to
the Registrar-General in form C in the First Schedule, and the
Registrar-General shall cause the registry thereof to be cancelled.
(2) If it shall be proved to his satisfaction that the same
congregation use some other such building for the purpose of
public Christian worship, he may register such new place of
worship instead of the disused building.
(3) Such cancellation or substitution when made shall be entered in
the book kept for the registry of such buildings, and shall be
certified and published in the manner prescribed in the case
of the original registry of the disused building.
(4)After such cancellation or substitution as aforesaid it shall not
be lawful to solemnize any marriage in such disused building,
unless the same shall be again registered in the manner
prescribed by section 10.
Rectification of 13.The Registrar-General may at any time correct or cause to be
errors. corrected any error in any entry made in the book kept under section
[6, 34 of 1946] 10 for the registration of buildings.
Publication of lists 14.The Registrar-General may from time to time publish in the Gazette a
of registrars and list of the Registrars of Marriages in Sri Lanka, with their names, the
registered names of their divisions, offices, and stations, and a list of the
buildings. buildings registered for the solemnization of marriages therein, and of
[7, 34 of 1946] which the registration has not been cancelled.
Prohibited age of 15.No marriage contracted after the coming into force of this section
marriage shall be valid unless both parties to the marriage have completed
[2, 18 of 1995] eighteen years of age.
Prohibited decrees 16.No marriage shall be valid
of relationship.
(a) where either party shall be directly descended from the other
; or
(b) where the female shall be sister of the male either by the full
or the half-blood, or the daughter of his brother or of his sister by
the full or the half-blood, or a descendant from either of them, or
daughter of his wife by another father, or his son's or grandson's
or father's or grandfather's widow ; or
(c) where the male shall be brother of the female either by the
full or the half-blood, or the son of her brother or sister by the
full or the half-blood, or a descendant from, either of them, or
the son of her husband by another mother, or her deceased
daughter's or granddaughter's or mother's or grandmother's
husband.
Marriage of 17.Any marriage or cohabitation between parties standing towards each
persons within other in any of the above-enumerated degrees of relationship shall be
prohibited degrees deemed to be an offence, and shall be punishable with imprisonment,
of relationship an simple or rigorous, for any period not exceeding one year.
offence.
18.No marriage shall be valid where either of the parties thereto shall
Second marriage
have contracted a prior m arriage which shall not have been legally
without legal
dissolved or declared void.
dissolution of first
marriage invalid.
Dissolution of 19. (1) No marriage shall be dissolved during the lifetime of the
marriage. parties except by judgment of divorce a vinculo matrimoniali
pronounced in some competent court.
(2) Such judgment shall be founded either on the ground of
adultery subsequent to marriage, or of malicious desertion, or
of incurable impotence at the time of such marriage.
(3) Every court in Lanka having matrimonial jurisdiction is
hereby declared competent to dissolve a marriage on any such
ground.
Suits to compel (1) No suit or action shall lie in any court to compel the
marriage 20. solemnization of any marriage by reason of any promise or
prohibited. contract of marriage, or by reason of the seduction of any
female, or by reason of any cause whatsoever.
(2) No such promise, or contract, or seduction shall vitiate any
marriage duly solemnized and registered under this Ordinance.
(3) Nothing herein contained shall prevent any person aggrieved
from suing for or recovering in any court damages which are
lawfully recoverable for breach of promise of marriage, for
seduction, or for any other cause:
Repealed 21. Section 21 is repealed by Act No. 3 of 1970
Who may give 22. (1)
(a) The father of any person under eighteen who may years of
consent to
age ; or
marriage of a
minor. (b) if the father be dead or under legal incapacity, or in parts
[2, 12 of 1997] beyond Sri Lanka and unable to make known his will, the
mother ; or
(c) if both father and mother be dead or under legal incapacity, or
in parts beyond Sri Lanka and unable to make known their will,
the guardian or guardians appointed over the party so under
age by the father, or if the father be dead or under legal
incapacity, by the mother of such party or by a competent court,
shall have authority to give consent to the marriage of such
party, and such consent is hereby required for the said
marriage :
Provided that no such consent shall be required in the case of a
widow or widower or a person who shall have been previously
married, and whose marriage shall have been legally dissolved.
(2) If there be no person authorized as aforesaid to give consent, or if
the person so authorized unreasonably withholds or refuses his or her
consent, the Judge of the District Court within whose jurisdiction the
party so under age resides, may, upon the application of any party
interested in such marriage, and after summary inquiry, give consent
to the said marriage, and such consent is hereby required for the said
marriage.
Preliminaries to be 23.In every case of marriage intended to be solemnized under the
observed prior to a provisions of this Ordinance the following preliminaries shall be
marriage. observed:
[11, 34 of 1946]
(1) If the parties to an intended marriage have been both resident in
Sri Lanka for ten days, one of the parties shall give notice to a
registrar of the division in which they have dwelt for not less
than ten days then next preceding or to the District Registrar in
whose district they have so dwelt.
(2) If both parties have not dwelt in the same division for ten
days then next preceding, but in different divisions, then each party
shall give notice to a registrar of the division in which he or she
has dwelt for not less than ten days next preceding the giving of
such notice or to the District Registrar in whose district
he or she has so dwelt.
(3) If one of the parties to an intended marriage has not been
resident in Sri Lanka for ten days next immediately preceding
the giving of notice, notice shall be given by the other party who
has been so resident to the registrar in whose division or to the
District Registrar in whose district he has been resident ten days
next preceding the giving of such notice.
(4) If neither party has been resident for ten days in Sri Lanka,
notice may be given to the registrar in whose division or to the
District Registrar in whose district one of the parties has been
resident for not less than four days.
(5) The notice given by one party under subsections (3) or (4) shall
be a sufficient notice of such intended marriage, and may be
given in anticipation of the arrival of the other party from abroad.
Form of notice and 24. (1) Every such notice may be given to the registrar at any place
declaration within his division, and shall be in the form D in the First Schedule,
[2, 24 of 2013] and shall state
[3, 12 of 1997]
(a) the name in full, race, age, profession, civil condition, and
[2, 47 of 1947]
dwelling place of each of the parties intending marriage, and
(b) if the case be so, that the other party is absent from Sri Lanka
or has not resided for ten days in any part of Sri Lanka (as the
case may be), and also
(c) the name in full and rank or profession of the father of each
such party.
(2) Such notice shall also bear on its face or shall have attached
thereto the written consent of any person whose consent is
required by law.
(3) The party giving the notice shall make and sign or subscribe a
declaration in writing in the body or at the foot of such notice
(a) that he or she believes that there is no impediment of kindred or
alliance or other lawful hindrance to the said marriage,
(b) that he or she has for the space of ten clear days or other
prescribed period immediately preceding the giving of such
notice dwelt within the division of the registrar to whom such
notice shall be so given, and
(c) that the consent of the person or persons whose consent is
required by law has been given.
(4) Every such notice and declaration shall be so signed and subscribed
in the presence of any one of the following persons, hereafter called an
attesting officer, namely
(a) the registrar of the division, or
(b) a Justice of the Peace, or
(c) a notary, or
(d) a minister,
and of two respectable witnesses.
The witnesses shall be personally acquainted with the party giving the
notice and (in the event of the party not being known to the attesting
officer) also with the attesting officer, and shall sign the notice. The
full names, rank or profession, and place of abode of the witnesses
shall be entered in the said notice.
(5) At the foot of the notice and declaration the attesting officer shall
make a certificate substantially as in the final column of the form D in
the First Schedule.
(6) Every notice to a Registrar of a Division or to a District Registrar
as the case may be, under subsection (1), (2) or (3) of section 23 or
every notice under subsection (4) thereof, shall be accompanied by a
receipt issued by the Registrar of such Division or such District
Registrar as the case may be, in proof of payment of a sum of rupees
ten or a sum of rupees thirty respectively or such other amount as
may be prescribed by the Minister from time to time.
Publication of 25. (1) Every registrar to whom notice of an intended marriage is
notice. duly given as aforesaid shall forthwith enter in the notice
the date of its receipt and shall file and keep it with the records
of his office, and shall forthwith enter the particulars of the
notice in a book to be called ' The Marriage Notice Book ',
which shall be kept in the form E in the First Schedule, and
which shall be open at all reasonable times without fee to
the inspection of all persons claiming to be interested in any
entry therein.
(2) The registrar shall cause a true copy under his hand of the
notice of marriage to be posted in some conspicuous place in
his office during twelve successive days after the entry of
such notice.
(3) If the parties to the intended marriage shall have given notice
to different registrars under subsection (2) of section 23, each
registrar shall also upon receipt of the notice, forward a certified
copy thereof to the other registrar, and give a like copy to the
party giving such notice.
Issue of certificate. 26. (1)At any time not less than twelve days (except as provided in
[11, 34 of 1946] section 27), nor more than three months (except as provided in
[2, 49 of 1944] section 31) from the entry of the notice, the registrar, or where
notice has been given to two registrars, each of them, or, in any
case referred to in section 28, the registrar nominated
in that behalf by the Registrar-General or by the District
Registrar, shall upon application of the party giving such notice,
and on receipt of the certified copy of the notice, if any given to
the other registrar, issue a certificate substantially in the form F
in the First Schedule :
Provided that in the meantime no lawful impediment to the
issuing of such certificate be shown to the registrar, and provided
that the issuing of such certificate shall not have been forbidden
or a caveat entered in the manner hereinafter provided.
(2) Every such certificate shall state
(a) the day on which it was entered,
(b) that the issue of the certificate has not been forbidden by
any person lawfully empowered in that behalf, and
(c) that the full period of twelve days has elapsed since the
entry of the notice, or where two notices have been given
since the entry of both notices, or that the issue of the
certificate has been authorized by licence under section 27.
Issue of licence 27.(1) At any time after the entry of the notice, and upon the production
[3, 22 of 2013] of a certified copy of such notice, the District Registrar within whose
[5, 41 of 1975] district such notice has been given or the registrar to whom notice has
been given, may issue, subject to the provisions of subsection (3), a
licence under his hand substantially in form G in the First Schedule
authorizing the District Registrar or the registrar to whom notice has
been given or, in any case referred to in section 28 such other registrar
as he may specify in the licence, to issue the certificate under section 26,
if in the meantime no lawful impediment to the issue of such certificate
is shown to the satisfaction of such registrar or if the issue of such
certificate has not been forbidden or a caveat entered in the
manner hereinafter provided.
(2) Where the parties to the intended marriage have given notice to
two registrars under subsection (2) of section 23, the District
Registrar within whose district one or both of such notices have been
given or either of the two registrars to whom notice has been given, may
issue upon the production of a certified copy of each such notice, and
subject to the provisions of subsection (3) of this section, a licence
to each of the registrars, or, in any case referred to in section 28, to
such other registrar as may be specified therein, and such licence
shall be substantially in the form H in the First Schedule,
(3) Before the issue of such licence one of the parties to the intended
marriage shall appear personally before the District Registrar or the
registrar, or where notice has been given to two registrars, before
either of those two registrars and make and subscribe a written
declaration that
(a) he or she believes that there is not any impediment of kindred
or alliance, or of any other lawful cause, or other lawful hindrance,
to the said marriage;
(b) that the consent of any person or persons whose consent is
required has been obtained; and
(c) that the issue of the certificate has not been forbidden, nor
any caveat entered, nor any suit is pending in any court to bar or
hinder the said marriage.
(4) Where the declaration is made before the District Registrar, the
party making the declaration shall pay rupees one hundred or such
amount as may be prescribed by the Minister from time to time, and
where the declaration is made before the Registrar of a Division it
shall be accompanied by a receipt issued by the District Registrar in
proof of payment of a sum of rupees one hundred or such amount as
may be prescribed.
(5) The registrar to whom the licence is issued shall, upon the receipt
thereof, issue his certificate, and every such certificate shall state the
particulars set forth in the notice and the day in which it was entered,
and that the issue of the certificate has been authorized by the licence
of the District Registrar or the registrar.
Issue of certificates 28. (1)Where, by virtue of any Notification under section 5 any area
and solemnization which is situated within any registration division (hereinafter
of marriages upon referred to as the 'old division') becomes, with effect from a
date
alteration of specified in that Notification, a separate division or a part of any
divisions. other existing division (hereinafter referred to as the 'new
[11, 34 of 1946] division'), and where, before that date, notice of an intended
[4, 49 of 1944] marriage is given by a party resident within that area, but the
certificate under section 26 is not issued before that date or the
marriage is not solemnized before that date, then,
notwithstanding anything in this Ordinance, that certificate may
be issued, or that marriage may be solemnized, and any other act
required by this Ordinance to be done in that connection by a
registrar of the old division may be done, by a registrar of the old
division or of the new division nominated in that behalf by the
District Registrar within whose district that area is situated ; and
every such registrar shall comply with such directions as may be
given to him by the District Registrar.
(2) The provisions of subsection (1) shall apply in every case
where one registration division is amalgamated with another
registration division to form a new division in like manner as
those provisions apply to a case where an area within any
registration division becomes a separate division or a part of
any other existing division.
Forbidding of issue 29. Every person whose consent to a marriage is required by law may
of certificate. forbid the issue of the registrar's certificate by signing and
subscribing, in the presence of the registrar and of two credible
witnesses, who shall be personally acquainted with the person
forbidding, and shall be known to the registrar or be resident within
his jurisdiction, and by delivering to him a notice in writing in the
form I in the First Schedule, with his or her name, place of abode, and
the capacity in which he or she forbids the marriage.
Caveat. 30. (1)Any person may at any time before the issue of the certificate
enter a caveat against its issue. Such caveat shall be in the form
J in the First Schedule.
(2) The caveat shall contain a statement of the name and residence
of the caveator, the names and residences of the parties to
whose marriage he objects, and the grounds on which he
objects to the marriage, and shall be written on paper bearing a
stamp of ten rupees, and shall be signed in the presence of the
registrar and of two credible witnesses (who shall be
personally acquainted with the caveator, and shall be known to
the registrar or be resident within his jurisdiction), and shall
be delivered to
the said registrar.
Proceedings on 31. (1) In the event of a marriage being forbidden or of a caveat
marriage being being entered as aforesaid, the registrar shall refuse to issue the
forbidden or caveat certificate, and shall forthwith make report of the objection to
entered. the District Judge of the district within which his division is
situated. Such report shall be in the form K in the First
Schedule, and shall be accompanied by a copy of the notice of
marriage and of the notice forbidding the marriage or of the
caveat entered.
(2) The District Judge shall thereon proceed to make summary
inquiry (in which the person forbidding the marriage or
entering the caveat shall be respondent) into the grounds of
objection to the marriage, and shall order the certificate to
issue or not to issue as shall appear to him just, and he shall
have power, if it be proved to his satisfaction in the course of
the inquiry that the marriage was forbidden or caveat entered
by such person, on frivolous or vexatious grounds, to impose
on him a fine not exceeding one thousand rupees.
(3) The order of the District Judge shall be subject to appeal to
the Court of Appeal.
(4) A copy of the order of the District Court, or of the Court of
Appeal in appeal, certified under the hand of the District Judge,
shall be forwarded by him to the registrar, who shall
thereon issue or refuse to issue the certificate as such order
shall direct.
(5) The time taken up in disposing as aforesaid of the objection
to the marriage shall not be taken into account in the
calculation of the period of three months under section 26 or
section 39.
Facilities for 32.(1) Where a marriage is intended to be solemnized in the United
marriages in Great Kingdom between a British subject there resident and a British
Britain and subject resident in Sri Lanka, a notice may be given, a declaration
Northern Ireland may be made and a certificate of notice of marriage may be issued in Sri
between British Lanka for the purpose of the said marriage by the registrar in the like
subjects resident in manner as if the marriage was to be solemnized in Sri Lanka.
Great Britain and
(2) Where a marriage is intended to be solemnized in Sri Lanka between
Northern Ireland
a British subject resident in the United Kingdom and a British
and British
subject resident in Sri Lanka, a certificate for marriage issued in
subjects resident in
England and Wales by a superintendent registrar, or in Scotland or
Sri Lanka and vice
Northern Ireland by a registrar, or a certificate of proclamation of
versa.
banns in Scotland, shall, for the purpose of the said marriage, have
the same effect as a certificate of notice of marriage issued under
section 26, and in any such case, on the production of the said
certificate, a marriage may be solemnized in pursuance of section 33
without any of the preliminaries prescribed by the above sections.
(3) For the purposes of this section the expression 'certificate for
marriage' in reference to certificates issued in Scotland shall mean a
certificate of due publication of notice of intention to marry.
(4) The provisions of section 39 shall not apply to a notice given for
the purpose of a marriage referred to in subsection (1) of this section.
Where may 33.On the production of the certificate of the registrar, or, where notice
[5, 49 of 1944] has been given to two registrars, on the production of a certificate
from each of the registrars, to a minister, or to a registrar (to whom
either or both the parties shall have given notice, or, in any case referred
to in section 28, who may be nominated in that behalf by the District
Registrar), it shall be lawful for a marriage to be solemnized between
the said parties
(a) by or in the presence of the minister in a registered place of
worship or other authorized place, or
(b) by the registrar in his office, station, or other authorized place
:
Provided that there be no lawful impediment to the marriage.
Solemnization of 34. (1) A marriage in a registered place of worship shall be
Marriage by solemnized by or in the presence of the minister of such
minister. building or a minister thereto authorized by him with open
[4, 22 of 2013] doors, between six o'clock in the morning and six o'clock in
[2, 11 of 2001] the afternoon in the presence of two or more credible
[5, 41 of 1975] witnesses, and according to the rules, customs, rites, and
[49, 11 of 1963] ceremonies of the church, denomination, or body to which
such minister belongs.
[3, 47 of 1947]
(2) Immediately after the solemnization of a marriage, the
minister shall enter in triplicate, in a book to be kept for that
purpose, a statement of the particulars of the marriage in
the Form L in the First Schedule. Every such entry shall be
numbered consecutively. The minister shall issue to the parties,
free of charge, the third copy of such statement and the same
be pram facie evidence of the solemnization of such marriage
according to the rules, customs, rites and ceremonies of
the
church, denomination or body to which such minister belongs.
(3) The statement shall be signed by the minister, by the parties
to the marriage, and by two respectable witnesses who shall have
been present at the solemnization thereof, and who shall be
personally acquainted with the parties and (in the event of the
parties not being known to the minister) also with the minister, and
whose full names, rank or profession, and places of residence
shall be added to the statement by the minister.
(4) The minister shall see that the particulars entered in the book
regarding the names, race, civil condition, age, profession or
occupation, and residence of the parties to the marriage correspond
with the particulars given in the registrar's certificate, and that the
parties and witnesses sign their names legibly. If any party or
witness signs illegibly, or affixes a mark or cross, the minister shall
write the name of such party or witness immediately over such
signature or mark, with the words 'This is the signature of ', or
'This is the mark of ', immediately preceding such name.
(5) The minister shall, within seven days from the date of the
solemnizing of the marriage, separate from the register book the
duplicate statement of the marriage and transmit the same to the
District Registrar within whose district the marriage was
solemnised together with a fee specified in the second schedule
to this Act, as may be prescribed by the Minister from time to time,
which is payable to such Registrar for the registration of such
marriage.
(6) The District Registrar shall, upon receipt of the minister's
duplicate statement, together with the stamps equal in value to
the amount of the fee payable to such registrar for the
registration of the marriage, forthwith send to the minister an
acknowledgment of the same, and enter or cause to be entered
the particulars thereof or of the copy prepared under section
37(2) in triplicate, that is to say, the original, the second copy
(hereinafter referred to as the 'duplicate' ), and a third copy in a
marriage register book to be kept by him, in the form M in the First
Schedule, and shall certify that the particulars have been obtained
from the minister's statement, and shall carefully preserve the said
minister's statement until despatched to the Registrar-General as in
section 37 provided. The third copy shall bear an endorsement
under the hand of the District Registrar to the effect that it is
issued under section 35A.
(7) No minister shall be compelled to solemnize a marriage
between persons either of whom shall not be a member of the
church, denomination, or body to which such minister belongs, nor
otherwise than according to the rules, customs, rites, and
ceremonies of such church, denomination, or body.
(8) A minister shall refuse to solemnize a marriage until the parties
thereto have paid to him, for transmission to the District Registrar,
the fee payable to such Registrar for the registration of the
marriage.
Solemnization of 35. (1) A marriage in the presence of the registrar shall, except as
marriage by hereinafter provided, be solemnized between the parties at his
registrar. office or station with open doors, and between the hours of six
[5, 41 of 1975] o'clock in the morning and six o'clock in the afternoon, and
in the presence of two or more respectable witnesses, and in the
following manner :-
(2) The registrar shall address the parties to the following effect
:-, ' Be it known unto you, A.B. and CD., that by the public
reception of each other as man and wife in my presence, and the
subsequent attestation thereof by signing your name to that effect
in the registry book, you become legally married to each other,
although no other rite of a civil or religious nature shall take
place; and know ye further that the marriage now intended to be
contracted cannot be dissolved during your lifetime except by a
valid judgment of divorce, and that if either of you before the death
of the other shall contract another marriage before the former
marriage is thus legally dissolved, you will be guilty of bigamy and
be liable to the penalties attached to that offence'.
(3) Each of the parties shall then make in the presence of the
registrar and witnesses the following declaration: ' I do
solemnly
declare that I know not of any lawful impediment why I, A. B.,
may not be joined in matrimony to C. D., here present', and each
party shall say to the other: ' I call upon all persons here present
to witness that I, A.B., do take thee, CD., to be my lawful
wedded wife (or husband)'.
(4) If either of the parties be deaf of dumb as well as unable to
write, the declaration and statement shall be interpreted to him or
her, and his or her assent obtained by whatever means of
communication are commonly used by him or her, and the registrar
shall take special care to satisfy himself that the party understands,
assents to, and adopts the declaration and statement.
(5) The registrar shall then enter in triplicate, that is to say, the
original, the second copy (hereinafter referred to as the ' duplicate')
and a third copy, a statement of the particulars of the marriage in
his marriage register book in the form M in the First Schedule, and
shall cause the entry to be signed by the parties and witnesses,
and himself sign it in the manner prescribed in regard to a marriage
solemnized by a minister, The third copy shall bear an
endorsement under the hand of the registrar to the effect that it is
issued under section 35A.
(6) Every such entry shall be numbered consecutively.
Copy of 35A.
registration entry The third copy referred to in the preceding section shall forthwith, free
to be issued free. of charge, be delivered or transmitted by post to the female party
[5, 41 of 1975] to the marriage by the District Registrar or the registrar.
Addition of 36.(1) Where a minister of any Christian church or persuasion reads or
religious ceremony celebrates in a registered place of worship any marriage service or
to marriage ceremony at the request of the parties to any marriage which has
solemnized by previously been solemnized by a registrar, such reading or celebration
registrar. shall not
[8, 34 of 1946] (a) be deemed to supersede or to affect in any way the marriage
previously solemnized as aforesaid; or
(b) be entered as a marriage in the register book kept by the
minister under section 34.
(2) No religious service or ceremony shall be read or celebrated at the
office or station of a registrar in connexion with the solemnization of
any marriage by the registrar.
Transmission to 37. (1)The duplicates of entries made by the registrar under section
Registrar-General 35 shall be separated from the book by him and sent monthly to
of duplicates of the District Registrar before the fifth day of the following
entries, substitution month and by the District Registrar, together with the
of original and duplicates of any entries made by him as well as duplicates, if
duplicate entries any, received from ministers under sections 34 and 40, to the
and reconstruction Registrar-General, who shall cause the same to be filed and
of original and preserved in his office; and if no marriage shall have been
duplicate entries. registered during any month, the said registrar shall certify such
[5, 41 of 1975] fact under his hand, and transmit such certificate in the manner
prescribed in regard to the transmission of the duplicate entry.
(2) Where a duplicate of an entry in a marriage register made
under section 34 or section 35 or section 40 is lost, damaged,
has become illegible or is in danger of becoming illegible the
Registrar-General may, after such inquiry as he may consider
necessary, cause such duplicate to be replaced by a copy of the
original entry, certified by the District Registrar or, if the
original entry is in the custody of the registrar or the minister,
certified by such minister or registrar, as the case may be, and
countersigned by the District Registrar after verification of the
copy with the original, and shall cause such copy to be filed
and preserved. Every copy so filed and preserved shall, for all
purposes, be deemed to be a duplicate duly filed and preserved
in the office of the Registrar-General, under subsection (1).
(3) Where an original of an entry in a marriage register made
under section 34 or section 35 or section 40 is lost, damaged,
has become illegible or is in danger of becoming illegible, and
the duplicate is available, the Registrar-General may, after such
inquiry as he may consider necessary, cause to be substituted
therefor a copy of the duplicate certified by him to have been
made after verification with the duplicate and to be a true
copy of the duplicate. Such copy shall replace the aforesaid
original of the registration entry and shall, for all purposes, be
deemed to be the original of the registration entry which was
lost, damaged, had become illegible or was in danger of
becoming illegible, as the case may be.
(4) Where both the original and the duplicate of an entry in a
marriage register made under section 34 or section 35 or section 40
are lost, damaged, have become illegible or are in danger of
becoming illegible, the provisions of section 13 of the Births and
Deaths Registration Act shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to and in
relation to the substitution of copies of such original and
duplicate. Such copies shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be
the original of the marriage registration entry and the duplicate,
respectively.
Solemnization of 38.(1) In case the female party to an intended marriage belongs to a class of
marriage by people to whose customs it is contrary to require their females to appear
minister or in public before wedlock, it shall be lawful for the District Registrar, if
registrar under he is satisfied after such inquiry as he may deem necessary that such
special licence. female party has at all times observed and continues to observe the
[5, 22 of 2013] customs of that class with regard to such appearance in public, to issue a
[11, 34 of 1946] licence empowering a registrar to solemnize the marriage at such place
[2, 15 of 1940] and hour as the parties may prefer, and as may be named in the licence:
Provided that the requirements of this Ordinance in all other respects
than the place and hour of marriage shall be fully complied with.
(2) In case the female party belongs to a class other than that
described in the preceding subsection or is in the opinion of the
District Registrar, not entitled to the benefits of that subsection, it
shall be lawful for the District Registrar upon the application of one
of the parties to the intended marriage, and which application shall be
accompanied by a receipt issued by the District Registrar in proof of
payment of a sum of rupees three thousand five hundred or such other
amount as may be prescribed by the Minister from time to time, to
issue a licence empowering a registrar to solemnise the marriage at
such place and hour as the parties may prefer and as they may be named
in this licence.
(3) Upon application by one of the parties to the proposed marriage or
by the minister by or before whom it is intended to be solemnized to
the District Registrar within whose district the marriage is to be
solemnized, the District Registrar may issue a licence to the minister
for the solemnization of the marriage at such place and at such hour
as the parties may prefer:
Provided that in every other respect the requirements of this
Ordinance shall be fully complied with, and provided further that the
requirements of section 34, subsections (2), (3), (4), (5), and (6), shall
apply to marriages solemnized hereunder.
New notice 39. Whenever a marriage shall not be had within three months, except as
required after three provided in section 31 (5), after the notice thereof shall have been
months. entered by the registrar, or, if notices have been given to and entered
by two registrars, after the earlier notice shall have been entered, the
notice and any licence or certificate which may have been granted
thereupon, and all other proceedings thereupon, shall be utterly void;
and no such marriage shall be solemnized or registered until new
notice shall have been given and certificate thereof issued in the
prescribed manner.
Death-bed (1) It shall be competent for a minister to solemnize without the
marriages. 40. preliminaries required by this Ordinance, at any convenient
[11, 34 of 1946] place, a marriage between parties of whom one is believed to be on
the point of death:
Provided that such person is of sound mind, memory, and
understanding.
(2) The minister shall immediately enter a statement of the
particulars of the marriage in the book and in the manner
prescribed by section 34. and shall at the foot of such entry,
which shall be made in duplicate, make a certificate signed by
himself and the witnesses to the solemnization, which certificate
shall be substantially to this effect -
'We certify that A. B., one of the parties to the above
marriage, is to the best of our knowledge and belief at the
point of death, but of sound mind, memory, and
understanding'.
(3) Within twenty-four hours of such solemnization the minister
shall send to the District Registrar the duplicate of such entry
and certificate.
(4) The District Registrar shall, upon receipt of such duplicate
and certificate, forward an acknowledgment of the same to the
minister, and shall cause a copy of the same to be posted for
twenty-one days in a conspicuous place in his own office and in
the office of the registrar within whose division the marriage was
solemnized.
(5) On the expiry of twenty-one days from the date of the first
posting of the copy as aforesaid by the District Registrar, he shall
enter the marriage in the marriage register book kept by him
under section 34:
Provided that no caveat shall have been lodged or other
proceedings taken by way of prohibition under sections 29 and
30, and on the registration of such marriage it shall be deemed to
be valid and effectual for all purposes as if the same had been
solemnized by or in the presence of the minister upon a
certificate issued by the proper registrar and the requirements of
section 34, subsections (2), (3), (4), (5), and (6), had been complied
with.
(6) In the event of any caveat being entered or proceedings being
taken by way of prohibition under sections 29 and 30, the
District Registrar shall not register the marriage till the order of the
District Court or of the Court of Appeal is made under section
31.
Entry made by 41. (1)The entry made by the registrar in his marriage register book
registrar in under sections 34, 35, and 40 shall constitute the registration of
marriage register the marriage, and shall be the best evidence thereof before all
trie best evidence courts and in all proceedings in which it may be necessary
of marriage. to give evidence of the marriage.
(2) The copy substituted under section 37 (2) for the lost duplicate
entry of a registrar shall for the purposes of this section be
deemed an original entry made by the registrar.
Proof of certain 42. After any marriage shall have been registered under this Ordinance it
matters not shall not be necessary, in support of such marriage, to give any proof
necessary to of the actual dwelling or of the period of dwelling of either of the parties
validity of previous to the marriage within the division stated in any notice of
registered marriage to be the place of his or her residence, or of the consent to any
marriage. marriage having been given by any person whose consent thereto was
required by law, or that the place or hour of marriage was the place or
hour prescribed by this Ordinance, nor shall any evidence be given to
prove the contrary in any suit or legal proceedings touching the validity
of such marriage.
Mode of supplying 43. (1) Where a marriage has been heretofore contracted or shall
omission and hereafter be contracted which, without fault of the parties
correcting error in thereto, may have been omitted to be registered, or may
registration. have been erroneously registered, either of the said parties, or
in the case of his or her death the issue or other lawful
representative of such party, may apply to the District Court
having jurisdiction over the division where the marriage was
contracted to have such marriage duly registered, or the
erroneous registration amended.
(2) The court, after due notice to the Registrar-General and the
registrar or minister before whom the marriage was contracted,
and to such other parties as the court shall deem expedient, and
after hearing such evidence as may be produced before it or as
it may think fit to call, shall, if it be satisfied that such marriage
has been duly contracted and not registered, or not correctly
registered, without fault of the parties thereto, order the
marriage to be correctly registered.
(3) The Registrar-General shall thereupon cause the marriage to be
correctly registered according to the directions of the court.
Correction of 44.Any clerical error which may from time to time be discovered in a
errors in registers. marriage register may, after due inquiry, be corrected by any person
[11, 34 of 1946] authorized in that behalf by the Registrar-General, subject to the rules
made under the provisions of this Ordinance.
Penalty on making 45. (a)Any person who shall knowingly or wilfully make any false
false declaration or declaration or sign any false notice required by this
giving false notice. Ordinance for the purpose of procuring the registration of any
marriage, and
(b) every person who shall forbid the granting by any registrar of a
certificate for marriage by falsely representing himself or
herself to be a person whose consent to such marriage is required
by law, knowing such representation to be false,
shall be guilty of the offence of giving false evidence under Chapter
XI of the Penal Code, and be liable to the penalties therein prescribed.
Circumstances in 46. If both the parties to any marriage shall knowingly and wilfully
which a marriage intermarry under the provisions of this Ordinance in any place other
will be null and than that prescribed by this Ordinance, or under a false name or names,
void. or except in cases of death-bed marriages under section 40, without
certificate of notice duly issued, or shall knowingly or wilfully
consent to or acquiesce in the solemnization of the marriage by a
person who is not authorized to solemnize the marriage, the marriage
of such parties shall be null and void.
Solemnization of 47. (1) If any valid marriage shall be had under this Ordinance by
marriage by means means of any wilfully false notice, certificate, or declaration
of a false made by either party to such marriage as to any matter to which
document. a notice, certificate, or declaration is required, it shall be competent
for the proper District Court to inquire therein, upon the
application of either of the parties, or, if the marriage shall have
been had without the consent of the person whose consent was by
law required, upon the application of such person or of the
Attorney-General.
(2) After due inquiry the court may order and direct that all
estate and interest in any property accruing to the offending
party by the force of such marriage shall be forfeited, and shall
be secured under the direction of the court for the benefit of the
innocent party or of the issue of the marriage or of any of them,
in such manner as the said court shall think fit for the purpose of
preventing the offending party from deriving any interest in any
real or personal estate or pecuniary benefit from such marriage.
(3) If both the contracting parties shall in the judgment of the court
be guilty of any such offence as aforesaid, it shall be lawful for the
court to settle and secure such property or any part thereof
immediately for the benefit of the issue of such marriage, subject
to such provision for the offending party by way of maintenance or
otherwise as the court may think fit.
(4) The order of the District Court shall be subject to appeal to
the Court of Appeal.
Settlements and 48. All agreements, settlements, and deeds entered into or executed by
agreements in the parties to any such marriage in contemplation of, or before, or
regard to such after, or in relation to, such marriage shall be absolutely void, and
marriage void. have no force or effect so far as the same shall be inconsistent with
the provisions of the security and settlement made by the court as
aforesaid.
Books to be kept 49. (1) The Registrar-General, District Registrars, registrars, and
by the General, ministers, shall keep books for the purposes of this Ordinance,
District Registrar, in such form as is prescribed by or under this Ordinance, and
c. shall care-
[11, 34 of 1946]
fully preserve such books, and shall at no time allow such books or
other documents kept under this Ordinance to remain out of their
possession, except in obedience to an order of a competent court,
or except as provided in this Ordinance, or by any rules made [§
11,34 of 1946] thereunder.
(2) Every registrar and every minister of a registered place of
worship shall, when called upon by the Registrar-General or by
the District Registrar within whose district such registrar's
division or such registered place of worship is situated, produce
for inspection all books, documents, and papers kept under this
Ordinance which are in his possession as such registrar or
minister.
(3). As each book of registers is completed by a registrar, he
shall forward it, with all connected books, documents, and
papers, to the District Registrar, who shall preserve them in his
office.
Forms. 50. (1) The forms in the First Schedule to this Ordinance, or forms
resembling the same, shall be used in all cases in which they
are applicable, and when so used shall be valid in law. [§11. 34
of 1946]
(2) The Minister, by rule made under section 7, may alter from
time to time all or any of the forms contained in the First
Schedule to this Ordinance, or in any rule made thereunder, in
such manner as may appear to him best for carrying into effect
this Ordinance, or may prescribe new forms for that purpose.
(3) Every form when altered in pursuance of this section shall
have the same effect as if it had been contained in the First
Schedule to this Ordinance.
Search of registers 51. (1)Any person shall be entitled, on making a written application to
and issue of the Registrar-General, District Registrar, or registrar, and
certified copies or under such conditions and on the payment of such fees as
extracts. shall be prescribed by the Minister, to refer to any book or
[6, 22 of 2013] document in the possession, of such Registrar-General.
[5, 41 of 1975] District Registrar, or registrar, and kept under this Ordinance
or under any enactment heretofore enacted relating to the
registration of marriages, and to demand, on payment of such
fees as the Minister may prescribe, a certified copy of or extract
from every entry in such book or document.
(2) The applicant shall pay in respect of every written
application and in respect of every certified copy or certified
extract thereof such amount as may be prescribed by the
Minister from time to time.
Third copy 52.Such copy or extract if purporting to be made under the hand of the
certified copy or Registrar-General or the District Registrar or an Additional District
extract to be Registrar or under the hand of the registrar or the third copy issued
evidence under section 35A shall be received as prima facie evidence of the
[5, 41 of 1975] matter to which it relates, without any further or other proof of such
entry.
Surrender of 53.In every case in which, a registrar shall cease to hold office, all the
registrar ceasing to books, documents, papers, and other articles in his possession as such
hold office. registrar shall be delivered by him or by his legal representative as
[11, 34 of 1946] soon as conveniently may be, with a list thereof to the District
Registrar who shall carefully arrange and preserve them in his office,
save and except the incomplete books which were in actual use by the
registrar at the time he ceased to hold office, and which shall be
delivered by the District Registrar to the successor in office of the
registrar.
Destruction of 54.Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Ordinance, any
documents. District Registrar may cause any of the following documents, that is
[3, 15 of 1940] to say—
(1) any notice referred to in section 23,
(2) any marriage notice book referred to in section 25,
(3) any certificate referred to in section 26,
(4) any licence or declaration, referred to in section 27,
(5) any application or licence referred to in section 38,
Penalty for no 55.If any person being, by virtue of his office as registrar or otherwise, in
delivery. possession of books, documents, papers, and other articles specified
[11, 34 of 1946] in section 53, shall fail, neglect, or refuse to deliver them to the
District Registrar, he shall be guilty of an offence punishable with
simple or rigorous imprisonment for any term not exceeding two
years, or with fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, or with both.
Penalty for losing 56.Every person having the custody of any book or document made
or injuring a under this Ordinance, or certified copy of such book or document or
document. of any part thereof, who shall carelessly lose or injure the same, or
[11, 34 of 1946] carelessly allow the same to be injured while in his keeping, shall be
guilty of an offence punishable with a fine not exceeding one hundred
rupees, or with simple or rigorous imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three months or with both such fine and such
imprisonment.
Penalty for 57.Every person who
destruction of
(a) shall, save as provided in section 54, knowingly and wilfully
documents and for
tear, deface, destroy, or injure any notice, certificate, declaration,
giving false
book, or any document whatsoever kept under this Ordinance, or
certificates.
under any enactment previously in force, or any part of such
[11, 34 of 1946]
document or of certified copy thereof or of part thereof; or
[4, 15 of 1940]
(b) shall knowingly and wilfully insert therein any false entry of
any matter relating to any marriage or intended marriage; or
(c) shall sign or issue any false certificate relating thereto; or
(d) shall certify any writing to be a copy or extract of any such
book or document, knowing such book or document to be false
in any particular, shall be guilty of an offence punishable with
imprisonment, simple or rigorous, for a term not exceeding
seven years, and with a fine not exceeding one thousand rupees.
Penalty for 58.Every registrar who without reasonable cause refuses or omits to
omission to register a marriage, or to accept or enter a notice of marriage, or any
register. particulars concerning which information has been tendered to him,
[11, 34 of 1946] and which he ought to accept and enter, shall be liable to a fine not
exceeding one hundred rupees.
Offences by 59.Any minister
minister.
(a) by or before whom, except in the case of a death-bed
marriage under section 40, shall be solemnized a marriage before
the delivery to him of the certificate or certificates required by
this Ordinance ; or
(b) who shall fail to enter duly in the marriage register the
statement of a marriage on the day in which it was solemnized
by him, or to transmit within seven days from the date of the
solemnization of the marriage the duplicate statement of the
marriage to the District Registrar ; or
(c) who shall enter in the marriage register any marriage not
solemnized in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance ; or
(d) who shall fail to perform any act required of him by this
Ordinance ; or
(e) who shall perform any act forbidden or declared unlawful by
this Ordinance,
Undue 60. (a)Any person who shall knowingly and wilfully solemnize or
solemnization of pretend to solemnize a marriage not being legally competent
marriage and issue to do so, or between parties not legally competent to contract
of certificate. the same, or, except in case of a deathbed marriage under
section 40, before the issue of the certificate or certificates
required by this Ordinance, or in any place or at any time not
authorized by the provisions of this Ordinance, or who shall
knowingly and wilfully solemnize a marriage declared to be
not valid or to be null and void by this Ordinance ; and
(b) any registrar who shall knowingly and wilfully issue a
certificate before or after the expiration of the prescribed
period, or, if the marriage shall have been forbidden or a
caveat entered under this Ordinance, before the disposal of
such objection by a competent court ; and
(c) any registrar or minister who shall knowingly disobey any
direction of the law as to the way in which he is to conduct
himself, intending to cause or knowing it to be likely to cause
injury to any person or to the Government,
Notices, 61. All notices, informations, declarations, certificates, requisitions,
informations, returns, and other documents required or authorized by this Ordinance
declarations, to be delivered, sent, or given to or by the Registrar-General, or a
certificates, c, how District Registrar, or a registrar, or a minister, may be sent by post
transmitted, (according to the prescribed rules of the Department of Posts) either
in a prepaid letter or free on State service, and the date at which they are
sent in the ordinary course of post shall be deemed to be the date at
which they were received; and in proving such receipt it shall be
sufficient to prove that the letter was prepaid, or (if it be a letter that
might according to the rules of the Department of Posts be sent free
on State service) sent free on State service, and that it was properly
addressed and put into the post.
Fees payable. 62. (1)Subject to the provisions of section 34, the fees enumerated
[7, 22 of 2013] in the second schedule which may be prescribed by the
[49, 11 of 1963] Minister from time to time shall be payable by and to the
[9, 34 of 1946] persons therein mentioned and for the duties therein specified.
In default of payment of such fee, the person to whom it is
payable shall, subject to the prescribed rules, refuse, until
payment, to perform the duty for which such fee is payable.
(2) In addition to the fees payable under subsection (1), whenever
a registrar enters a notice of marriage or solemnizes a marriage
at any place other than his office there shall be paid to him by
the person requiring him to enter such notice or solemnize
such marriage as expenses incurred by him in travelling
from his residence to such place and returning from such
place to his residence, a sum equal to the fare that would be
payable under any law for the time being in force in the area
for a motor cab in respect of a journey of the same length and
duration, and if there is no such law for the time being in force
in that area, then a sum calculated at such rate as may be
prescribed.
Proceedings in 63.All proceedings in a Court of Justice under this Ordinance shall be
courts to be exempt exempt from stamp duty unless otherwise specially provided.
from stamp duty.
Interpretation. 64.In this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires
[8, 22 of 1955]
'district' means administrative district;
'District Registrar' in any section (other than section 8 or section 9)
in which any power, duty or function of that officer is prescribed or
referred to, includes an Additional District Registrar;
'marriage' means any marriage, save and except marriages contracted
under and by virtue of the Kandyan Marriage Ordinance, 1870,
(Repealed by Act No. 44 of 1952.) or the Kandyan Marriage and
Divorce Act, and except marriages contracted between persons
professing Islam;
'minister' means any person ordained or set apart for the ministry of
the Christian religion according to the customs, rules, ceremonies, or
rites of the church, denomination, or body to which such person
belongs;
'prescribed' means prescribed by rule made under section 7.
FormB
[Section 10 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRY OF BUILDING FOR THE SOLEMNIZATION OF MARRIAGES
(3).]
No. of Certificate :—
In pursuance of the application and declaration made under section 10 of the Marriage Registration Ordinance,
I hereby certify that the building, used as a place of public Christian worship, described below, has been duly
registered for the solemnization of marriages.*
Situation Religious
Denomination on
Description Village or Street and Pattu, Korate, or other District Proprietors or whose behalf the
Division of Town Division of the District Trustees Building is
registered
Witness my hand at.............................this......................day of..................,19....................
Registrar-General.
* In certificates of substitution add : " in lieu of the building registered under certificate No........ of the
...... day of ........ 19 ...., which is no longer used for the public worship of the congregation on whose behalf
it was registered ".
[Section 12.] Form C
I do hereby declare that the under-mentioned building has ceased to be used for public Christian worship of the
congregation on whose behalf it was registered.
Witness my hand at........................this.................................day of.............,19
Minister, or Proprietor, or Trustee.
Situation
Description Patlu, Korale, District Number and Date Name of Proprietor Religious
Village or Street or other of Certificate or Trustee in whose Denomination on
and Division of Division of of Registry name registered whose behalf
Town the District registered
VI/224
MARRIA GES (GENERAL) [Cap. 131
FormG
LICENCE FOR ISSUE OF REGISTRAR'S CERTIFICATE [Section 27
(1).]
Whereas on the ............... day of ............... ,19 ...., notice was given to the •Registrar of
Marriages of the division of............... f within the ............... District of which I am the District
Registrar/for which I am an Additional District Registrar, of a marriage intended to be had between ..........
..... and ........... therein mentioned, and the said ............... desires to obtain a licence for the
immediate issue of a certificate of such notice, and has made before the District Registrar of the ..............
District (or an Additional District Registrar for the ............... District) the declaration required for that
purpose by subsection (3) of section 27 of the Marriage Registration Ordinance :
Now, therefore, in pursuance of the provisions of the said Ordinance, I do hereby authorize the said registrar to
issue the said certificate at any time hereafter, and within three calendar months of the said ...............
day of ................ 19 .....
Given under my hand this ............... day of ............... ,19......
District Registrar,
or Additional District Registrar.
* Where the notice has been given to the District Registrar or to an Additional District Registrar, substitute " to
the District Registrar of the ............District" or "to an Additional District Registrar for the
.......... -District ", as the case may be.
} Strike out the words which are inapplicable.
FormH
[Section 27
LICENCE FOR ISSUE OF REGISTRAR'S CERTIFICATE
(2)-]
Whereas in pursuance of section 23 of the Marriage Registration Ordinance on the ............... day of
................ 19 ...... notice was given to ................ Registrar of Marriages of the division of
................ of a marriage intended to be had between ............... and ............... therein
mentioned, and a like notice on the ............... day of................ 19 ...., was given to .......
......... Registrar of Marriages of the division of ...............;
And the said ............... desires to obtain a licence for the immediate issue of a certificate, and has made
before the District Registrar of the ............... District (or an Additional District Registrar for the ......
......... District) the declaration required for that purpose by subsection (3) of section 27 of the said
Ordinance:
Now, therefore, in pursuance of the provisions of the said Ordinance, I do hereby authorize the Registrar of the
division of ............... to issue a certificate of the notice given to him at any time hereafter, and within
three calendar months of the said ............... day of................ 19 .....
Given under my hand this ................ day of................ 19 .....
District Registrar,
or Additional District Registrar.
VI/227
Form I
[Section 29.] NOTICE FORBIDDING ISSUE OF CERTIFICATE
To the Registrar of Marriages of.............................
Take notice that I, A. B.. of Colombo, being father (or mpther, or lawfully appointed guardian) of C. D.. of
Colombo, do hereby, under section 29 of the Marriage Registration Ordinance, forbid the issue of a certificate for
Ihe solemnization of the marriage intended to be had between him (or her) and E. F., of Colombo, as the said
C. D. is under iweniy-one years of age, and has not obtained my consent to the said marriage as required by
section 22 of the aforesaid Ordinance.
Dated at..................................,this................................day of........................19
Witnesses:
(Signature)
Form J
[Section 30.] CAVEAT FORBIDDING ISSUE OF CERTIFICATE
To the Registrar of Marriages of the division of Colombo.
I, A. B.. of Colombo, do hereby enter a caveat against the grant of certificate for the marriage intended to be
had between C. D., of Colombo, and E. F., of Colombo, the parties named in the notice entered in the Marriage
Notice Book of the division of Colombo on the ................ on the ground (here state ground).
Signed a.....................,this..................................day of....................19..........., in the presence
of:
(1) Witness:.........................
(2) Witness:.......................,
(3) Registrar:............................
A. B.
FormK
[Section 31.] REPORT BY THE REGISTRAR TO THE JUDGE OF THE FAMILY COURT WHEN ISSUE OF CERTIFICATE is FORBIDDEN
To........................... the Judge of the Family Court of..................................
A. B., of Colombo, having entered a caveat (or delivered a notice), of which copy is annexed, forbidding the
issue of the certificate for the marriage intended to be had between C. D., of Colombo, and E. F., of Katutara, the
parties named in the annexed copy of notice duly entered in the)Marriage Notice Book on the ................
I, G. H; Registrar of Marriages for the division of Colombo, do hereby apply to you for adjudication and decision
thereon, as provided by section 31 of the Marriage Registration Ordinance.
Dated at....................,this..........................day of........................,19.................................
G.H.,
Registrar.
(Hereto annex a certified copy of the notice of the intended marriage and of the notice or caveat forbidding issue
of certificate.)
VI/228
This marriage was solemnized between us................................., in the presence of:
1 Signature of witness:........
2 Name in full, rank or profession, and residence of witness :.............................
1Signature of witness :...............
2Name in full, rank or profession, and residence of witness :.......................................
Signed before me,.................................................
Registrar or Minister.
» I certify that the above is a true copy of the statement No. ................ furnished to me under section
34 of the Marriage Registration Ordinance, of a marriage solemnized by or in the presence of ................
minister.
Date of entry in District Registrar's Register:...............................................
Registrar.
* To be filled up only when entering a marriage solemnized by or in the presence of a minister.
(Section 62.] SECOND SCHEDULE
[§5, Law 41 of
1975.]
Payable to whom For what duty Payable by whom Amount
Rs. c.
R. e.gistrar . . Entering a notice of marriage at his office .A p.plicant . . 0 50
Do. . . Entering a notice of marriage at any other do. . . 2 50
place
Do. . . Issuing certificate of notice of marriage do. . . 0 50
Do. . . For every marriage solemnized in his office Parties to marriage 11 50
Do. . . For every marriage solemnized outside his do. ... 5 00
office under section 38 (1)
D. istrict Registrar . . For every marriage solemnized outside his do. . . 75 00
office under section 38 (2)
Additional District Registrar . . do. . . do. . . 50 00
R. e.gistrar . . do. . . .d o. . 20 00
District Registrar Registration of marriage solemnized in a do. . . 11 50
registered place of public worship
VI/230