SRI LANKA
Judicature Act
(Consolidated Code and Amendments up to 2023)
Published by
LANKA LAW
www.lankalaw.net
Copyright LankaLAW@2024 www.lankalaw.net
ACT AND AMENDMENT PAGE
Judicature Act Consolidated up to 1999 3-24
31/2007 : Judicature (Amendment) 25-27
10/2010 : Judicature (Amendment) 28-30
26/2017 : Judicature (Amendment) 31-33
9/2018 : Judicature (Amendment) 34-47
5/2019 : Judicature (Amendment) 48-51
4/2022 : Judicature (Amendment) 52-55
34/2022 : Judicature (Amendment) 56-81
Copyright LankaLAW@2024 www.lankalaw.net
JUDICATURE
AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT AND
CONSTITUTION OF A SYSTEM OF COURTS OF FIRST INSTANCE
IN TERMS OF ARTICLE 105 (1) OF THE CONSTITUTION, TO
DEFINE THE JURISDICTION OF AND TO REGULATE THE
PROCEDURE IN AND BEFORE SUCH COURTS/AND TO PROVIDE
FOR MATTERS CONNECTED WITH OR INCIDENTAL TO THE
MATTERS AFORESAID.
Act Nos,
2 of 1978
37 of 1979
71 of 1981 [ 18th November , 1981 ]
35 of 1983 [ 4th October , 1983 ]
36 of 1983 [ 4th October , 1983 ]
50 of 1985 [ 27th December , 1985 ]
16 of 1989 [ 8th November , 1989 ]
29 of 1991 [ 9th August , 1991 ]
30 of 1991 [ 9th August , 1991 ]
27 of 1998 [ 4th June , 1998 ]
27 of 1999 [ 30th August , 1999 ]
Gazette Nos,
1380-17-2005
678-14-1991
[2nd July , 1979 ]
Short title.1. This Act may be cited as the Judicature Act.
CHAPTER I
COURTS AND THEIR TERRITORIAL LIMITS
The Courts of First 2. The Courts of First Instance for the administration of justice in the
Instance. Republic of Sri Lanka shall be-
[ 2,16 of 1989]
(a) the High Court of the Republic of Sri Lanka;
(b) the District Courts ;
(c)the Small Claims Courts;
(d) the Magistrates' Courts;
Division of Sri 3* Fo r the purpose of the administration of justice Sri Lanka shall be divided
Lanka for into judicial zones, Judicial districts and Judicial divisions within such
judicial territorial limits as may in consultation with the Chief Justice and the
purposes. President of the Court of Appeal from time to time be determined by the
Minister by Order published in the Gazette :
Provided that the judicial zones, districts and divisions and their respective territorial limits as
were in existence on the day preceding the date on which the provisions of this section are
brought into operation * shall continue to be the zones, districts and divisions and their
respective territorial limits under this Act until such Order of the Minister is published in the
Gazette. (*1st July.1979)
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE COURTS OF FIRST INSTANCE
Composition of the 4. The High Court of the Republic of Sri Lanka shall be a Court of
High Court. record and shall consist of
[ 2,71 of 1981]
[ 2,35 of 1983] (a) not less than ten and not more than forty Judges, each of
[ 3,16 of 1989]
whom shall be known as a " Judge of the High Court" ;
(b) such Commissioners of the High Court as are appointed
under Article 111A of the Constitution.'.
District Courts, 5 .
Small Claims Courts
and Magistrates' (1) There shall be in such judicial district of Sri Lanka a "
Courts. District Court" and in every judicial division there shall be a
[ 3,71 of 1981] "Small Claims Court" and " Magistrates' Court" and each
[ 4,16 of 1989] such court shall be holden by and before one person to be
called the " District Judge ", " Judge of the Small Claims
Court" and "Magistrate" respectively.
(3) Each court referred to in subsection (1) may be held at
such convenient place or places within such judicial district
or division, as the case may be, as the Minister shall by
regulation from time to time appoint:
Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to
restrict or curtail the power possessed by every Judge to
hold court at any convenient place within his territorial
jurisdiction.
Judicial 5A.
day.
[ 5,16 of (1) For the purpose of sittings for conducting trials and inquiries in
1989]
every Court of First Instance a working calendar day shall be divided
into two judicial days, each such judicial day beginning not later than
9.45 a.m. and 1.15 p,m. respectively.
(2) Trials and inquiries shall be fixed for every web. Judicial day.
(3) Every such judicial day shall, for the purposes of subsections (1)
and (2) consist of a sitting in open court of a minimum duration of two
and a half hours.
(4) Where any judge of any Court of First Instance is unable to comply
with the provisions of this section he shall record the reasons for such
inability and shall forthwith forward a copy of such reasons to the
Judicial Service Commission.
Appointm ent of 5B.
the Master.
[ 5,16 of 1989] (1) There shall be appointed to every such court as may be
specified by the Minister by Order published in the Gazette, in
consultation with the Chief Justice, an officer to be called the
Master.
(2) The Master shall sit separately and exercise ail the powers or
jurisdiction vested in him by subsection (3).
(3) The Master shall attend to and deal with all pre trial and
postrial matter as arise in the course of a civil proceeding
instituted in the court to which he is appointed, including the
framing of issues and the recording of admissions :
Provided that it shall be competent for the trial judge to record
such admissions and frame such,issues, whether by way of
amendment of existing issues or otherwise, as may be
considered to be appropriate during the conduct of the trial
before; him.
(4) The Master may, with the concurrence of the judge of the
court, submit for determination by such judge any matter which,
may otherwise have been properly dealt with by him.
(5) The judge of any court may refer to the Master any matter of
a procedural nature arising in the course of an action instituted in
that court after the stage referred to in subsection (3).
(6) The Master shall have the power to do all such acts
connected with or incidental or ancillary to, the exercise of the
powers and jurisdiction vested in him by subsection (3),
including the maintenance of the Journals of the Court.
Appointment of 5C.
the recorder.
[ 5,16 of 1989] (1) There shall be appointed to every court as may be specified
by the Minister by Order published in the Gazette, in
consultation with the Chief Justice, an officer to Be called the
Recorder.
(2) The Recorder shall sit separately and exercise all the powers
or jurisdiction vested in him by subsection (3).
(3) The Recorder shall attend to and deal with all pre-trial and
post-trial matters not including sentencing as arise in the course
of a criminal proceeding instituted in the Court to which he is
appointed, including the recording of admissions and
confessions : Nothing in this section shall prejudice the powers
of the trial judge to record such admissions as may be
considered to be appropriate during the conduct of the trial
before him.
(4) The provisions of subsections (4),(5) and (6) of section 5B
shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to and in relation to, the powers
and functions of a Recorder appointed under subsection (1).
Appointment 6.
retirement of
Judges. (1) Every District Judge, Judge of the Small Claims Court and
[ 4,71 of 1981] Magistrate and all such Additional Judges and Magistrates of
[ 3,35 of 1983] such courts shall be appointed to their offices by the Judicial
[ 6,16 of 1989]
Service Commission.
(2) Every person appointed to be or to act as a Judge or
Magistrate, as the case may be, of a Court of First Instance shall
before he enters upon his office take and subscribe or make and
subscribe the oath or affirmation of office prescribed in the
First Schedule hereto.
(3) The age of retirement of a Judge of the High Court (other
than a Commissioner of the High Court appointed under Article
111A of the Constitution) shall be sixty-one years.
(4) The age of retirement of all other Judges and Magistrates
shall be as provided by rules made under the Public and
Judicial Officers (Retirement) Ordinance.
Salaries of the Jud ges of the 7. The salaries of the Judges of the High Court shall be charged
High Court. on the Consolidated Fund.
Appointment of 8.
additional
Judges, c. (1) The Judicial Service Commission may appoint as many
[ 5,71 of 1981] Additional District Judges, Judges of the Small Claims Court
[ 7,16 of 1989]
and Magistrate's Court respectively in as the occasion may
require.
(2) Every Additional District Judge, Judge of the Small Claims
Court or Magistrate appointed to any such Court, shall sit
separately and exercise all the powers and the jurisdiction
vested in the District Court, the Small Claims Court or the
Magistrate's Court as the case may be.
(3) Every Magistrate appointed to a judicial division shall have
concurrent jurisdiction with the Magistrate appointed for every
other judicial division, for the purposes of exercising
jurisdiction under section 9(b) (iii) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act, No, 15 of 1979.
CHAPTER III
THE HIGH COURT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA
Criminal 9.
jurisdiction.
[ 6,71 of 1981] (1) The High Court shall ordinarily have the power and authority
and is hereby required to hear, try and determine in the manner
provided for by written law all prosecutions on indictment
instituted therein against any person in respect of-
(a) any offence wholly or partly committed in Sri Lanka
,
(b) any offence committed by any person on or over the
territorial waters of Sri Lanka;
(c) any offence committed by any person in the air
space of Sri Lanka;
(d) any offence committed by any person on the high
seas where such offence is piracy by the law of nations;
(e) any offence wherever committed by any person on
board or in relation to any ship or any aircraft of
whatever category registered in Sri Lanka; or
(f) any offence wherever committed by any person, who
is a citizen of Sri Lanka, in any place outside the
territory of Sri Lanka or\on board or in relation to any
ship or aircraft of whatever category.
(2) The jurisdiction of the High Court shall subject to the
provisions of any other law-
(a) in respect of any offence committed wholly or partly
in Sri Lanka referred to in paragraph (a) of subsection
(1), be ordinarily exercised by the High Court holden in
a judicial zone within which such offence was wholly
or partly committed;
(b) in respect of any offence committed in any place
referred to in paragraphs (b) to (f) of subsection (1)
shall be exercised by the High Court holden in the
judicial zone nominated by the Chief Justice by a
direction in writing under his hand :
Provided that the Chief Justice may may, if he deems fit, direct by
writing under his hand that the High Court holden in any zone
nominated by him shall hear and determine any offence referred to
in paragraph (a) would ordinarily have been heard and determined
by the High Court holden in any other judicial zone.
Sentence.1 0. The Judges of the High Court may impose any sentence or other penalty
prescribed by written law.
Trial 11.
by
Jury. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) all trials in the High
[ 8,16 of Court shall be before a Judge of the High Court sitting alone without a
1989]
Jury.
(2) Trial in the High Court shall be by Jury before a Judge of the High
Court where at least one of the charges is for an offence referred to in
the Second Schedule hereto arid the accused elects to be tried by a Jury.
(3) The election by the accused, to be tried by a Jury, shall be made at
any time before the commencement of the trial.
Trials 12.
at Bar.
(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Act or any other
written law, trials at Bar shall be held by the High Court in accordance
with the law for the time being in force for offences punishable under
the Penal Code and other laws.
(2) The Chief Justice shall nominate a Bench of three Judges of the
High Court naming one of them as the Chairman and also specifying the
zone where such trial shall beheld:
Provided that the Chief Justice shall not by reason of the fact that he has
made an order under this subsection be disqualified or precluded from
hearing any appeal to the Supreme Court in any matter which is the
subject of a direction made by him under this subsection.
Admira lty 13.
jurisdiction.
[ 9,16 of 1989] (1) Admiralty jurisdiction is hereby vested in the High Court and
shall ordinarily be exercised by a Judge of the High Court sitting
in the judicial zone of Colombo ; Provided that the Minister may
by Order published in the Gazette empower a Judge of the High
Court sitting in any other judicial zone also to exercise Admiralty
jurisdiction and define the territorial limits and the territorial
waters.* if any, adjacent thereto for the purpose of the exercise of
such jurisdiction.
(2) The Admiralty jurisdiction vested in the High Court shall be as
provided for by law for the time being in force. The rules in force
immediately prior to the coming into operation of this Act, shall
continue to be in force until new rules are made, and any acts done
in pursuance of these rules, after the coming into operation of this
Act shall be deemed to have been, and to be, validly done.
(3)
(a) Any person who is dissatisfied with any final
judgment given in the exercise of Admiralty
jurisdiction may prefer an appeal to the Court of Appeal
against such judgment for any error in fact or in law.
(b) Any person who is dissatisfied with any order made
in the exercise of Admiralty jurisdiction may appeal
against such order to the Court of Appeal for the
correction of any error in fact or in law with the leave
of the Court of Appeal first had and obtained.
(c) Every appeal to the Court of Appeal and every
application for leave to appeal shall be made as nearly
as may be in accordance with the procedure prescribed
by the Civil Procedure Code.
(*See als o sections 2 and 11 of the Maritime Zones Law.)
Right of appeal 14. Any person who stands convicted of any offence by the High Court
in criminal cases. may appeal therefrom to the Court of Appeal-
(a) in a case tried with a jury-
(i) against his conviction on any ground which
involves a question of law alone; or
(ii) against his conviction on any ground which
involves a question of fact alone, or a question of
mixed law and fact; or
(iii) with the leave of the Court of Appeal against the
sentence passed on his conviction, unless the
sentence is one fixed by law;
(b) in a case tried without a jury, as of right, from any
conviction or sentence except in the case where-
(i) the accused has pleaded guilty; or
(ii) the sentence is for a period of imprisonment of
one month of whatsoever nature or a fine not
exceeding one hundred rupees;
Provided that in every such case there shall be an appeal on a
question of law or where the accused has pleaded guilty on the
question of sentence only.
Right of the Attor ney- 15. The Attorney-General may appeal to the Court of Appeal in the
General to appeal in following cases :-
criminal cases.
(a) from an order of acquittal by a High Court-
(i) on a question of law alone in a trial with or
without a jury ;
(ii) on a question of fact alone or on a question
of mixed law and fact with leave of the Court of
Appeal first had and obtained in a trial without a
jury;
(b) in all cases on the ground of inadequacy or illegality of
the sentence imposed or illegality of any other order of the
High Court.
Right of party 16.
aggrieved to
appeal in criminal (1) A person aggrieved by a judgment, order or sentence of the
cases. High Court in criminal cases may appeal to the Court of
Appeal with the leave of such court first had and obtained in
all cases in which the Attorney-General has a right of appeal
under this Chapter.
(2) In this section "a person aggrieved" shall mean any person
whose person or property has been the subject of the alleged
offence in respect of which the Attorney-General might have
appealed under this Chapter and shall, if such person be dead,
include his next of kin namely his surviving spouse, children,
parents or further descendants or brothers or sisters.
(3) Nothing in this section shall in any way affect the power of
the Court of Appeal to act by way of revision in an appropriate
case.
Sittings of 17. Th e High Court may subject to the provisions of this Act exercise its
the High jurisdiction within any of the judicial zones specified and in existence under the
Court, provisions of section 3, and the Chief Justice may from time to time nominate and
[ 7,71 of 1981] assign by writing under his hand a Judge of the High Court to exercise such
[ 4,35 of 1983] jurisdiction of the High Court at sittings in the zone, as specified in such writing.
Every Commissioner of the High Court appointed under Article 111A of the
Constitution shall exercise such jurisdiction of the High Court within the judicial
zone specified in his warrant of appointment.
Contempt of 18. The High Court shall have power and authority to take cognizance of and
High Court. try in a summary manner any offence of contempt committed against or in
disrespect of its authority, and on conviction to commit the offender to jail for a
period not exceeding five years. Such imprisonment shall be simple or rigorous
as the court shall direct and the offender may, in addition thereto, or in lieu
thereof, in the discretion of the court be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
five thousand rupees.
CHAPTER IV
DISTRICT COURTS
Jurisdiction of 19.
District Courts.
[ 10,16 of 1989] (1) Every District Court shall be a court of record and shall
within its district have unlimited original jurisdiction in all civil
revenue, trust, matrimonial, insolvency and testamentary matters,
save and except such of the aforesaid matters as are by or under
this Act or by virtue of the provisions of any other enactment
exclusively assigned by way of original jurisdiction to any other
court of vested in any other authority and In the exercise of such
jurisdiction to impose fines, penalties and forfeitures and shall in
fake manner also have jurisdiction over the persons and estates of
persons of unsound mind, minors and wards, over the estates of
constuisque trust and over guardians and trustees and in any other
matter in which jurisdiction is given to District Courts by law.
Civil 19 A. Every District Court shall have cognizance of and full power to hear and
jurisdiction. determine all pleas, suits and actions in which a party defendant shall be
[ 11,16 of 1989] resident within the district in which any such suit or action shall be brought, or
in which the cause of action shall have arisen within such district or where the
land in respect of which the action is brought lies, or is situate wholly or partly
within such district, or the contract sought to be enforced was made within such
district.
Custody of persons 20.
and estates of
idiots, persons of (1) Every District Court shall have the care and custody of
unsound mind, c. the persons and estates of all idiots and persons of unsound
mind and others who by reason of their mental or physical
infirmities, or both such infirmities, are incapable of looking
after or managing their persons or their affairs as the case
may be and are resident within its district with full power to
make them wards of the court and to appoint guardians and
curators of all such persons and their estates, and to make
order for the maintenance of such persons and the proper
management of their estates, and to take proper securities for
such management from such guardians and curators, and to
call them to account, and to charge them with any balance
which may be due to any such persons as aforesaid, or to
their estates, and to enforce the payment thereof and to take
order for the secure investment of any such balance; and such
guardians and curators from time to time remove and replace
as occasion may require.
(2) When any person is made a ward of court under
subsection (1) he shall not be removed from Sri Lanka
without the leave of court which may be granted subject to
such terms and conditions as the court may by order impose
including orders for security. Any person knowingly
removing or assisting in such removal without leave of court
shall be liable to be punished as for a contempt of court.
(3) The jurisdiction and powers of District Courts under this
section as regards the charge of the property of persons of
unsound mind and mentally deficient persons shall extend to
the charge of the property in Sri Lanka of persons of unsound
mind and mentally deficient persons who are not resident in
Sri Lanka and may be exercised by any District Court within
whose territorial limits any such property is situate.
(4) A "mentally deficient person" means a person mentally ill
or feeble and incapable of managing his own affairs though
not adjudicated a person of unsound mind in accordance with
the law for the time being in force.
Testamentary 21. Every District Court shall have full power and authority subject to and in
Jurisdiction. accordance with the law in force for the time being-
(1) to appoint according to the law in force for the time being
administrators of the estates and effects of any persons dying
either intestate, or who may not by any last will or testament
have appointed any executor or trustee for the administration of
such estates or effects, whether such estates or effects may be
within such district or any other district or districts within Sri
Lanka;
(2) to inquire into and determine upon the validity of any
document or documents adduced before it as and for the last will
and testament of any person who may have died leaving property
in Sri Lanka, and to record the same, and to grant probate
thereof;
(3) to appoint administrators for the administration or execution
of the trusts of any such last will or testament as aforesaid in
cases where the executors or trustees thereby appointed shall not
appear and take out probate thereof, or having appeared and
taken out such probate, shall have resigned their office or shall
by death or otherwise become incapable to carry any such trust
fully into execution ; and
(4) to take proper securities from all executors (whenever it shall
seem to the court expedient to require the same) and all
administrators of the last wills and testaments of any deceased
persons or of the estates and effects of any persons who may
have died interstate, and from the attorneys of any executors who
may apply for administration of the last wills and testaments of
any deceased persons for the faithful performance of such trusts,
and for the proper accounting in such court for what may come
into their hands or be by them expended in the execution thereof
and to call them to account; and when it shall seem to such court
expedient, to cause all accounts rendered by them to be duly and
carefully audited and examined and to charge them with any
balance which may from time to time remain in their hands,
applicable for the performance of such trusts and to enforce the
payment thereof, and to take order for the secure investment of
any such balances and the apportionment and payment thereof
among and to such persons as shall be found entitled to the same,
and such administrators from time to time to remove and replace
as occasion may require.
Tansfer of 22. Where any court shall, under the provisions of this Chapter, have issued
Testimentary probate of the will or letters of administration of the estate or effects of any
cases. person who shall have left property within the jurisdiction of any other court,
or where any application for such probate or letters of administration shall
have been made to any court, it shall be lawful for the Court of Appeal, on
application showing good grounds therefor, to make order for the transfer of
any cause, suit, action, or matter in regard to any such probate or
administration so pending in any such court, to such other court; and the
court to which the same shall be so transferred shall take cognizance thereof,
and have power and jurisdiction in all respects with regard thereto as
effectually to all intents and purposes as the court which originally had
cognizance of the same.
Appeal. 23.
[2, 37 of
1979]
(1) Any person who is dissatisfied with, any judgment pronounced by a
[ 12,16 of
1989] District Court in any civil action, proceeding or matter to which he is a
party may prefer an appeal to the Court of Appeal against such
judgment far any error in fact or in law.
(2) Any person who is dissatisfied with any order made by a District
Court in the course of any civil action, proceeding or matter to which
he is or seeks to be a party, may prefer an appeal to the Court of
Appeal against such order for the correction of any error in fact or in
law, with the leave of the Court of Appeal first had and obtained.
CHAPTER V
SMALL CLAIMS COURTS [§ 13,16 of 1989]
Jurisdiction of 24.
Small Claims
Courts. (1) Every Small Claims Court shall be a court of record and shall
[ 8,71 of 1981] have exclusive original jurisdiction and shall have cognisance of
and full power to hear and determine all actions in which the
debt, damage, or demand does not exceed such sum as may be
specified by the Minister by an Order published in the Gazette
and in which the party or parties defendant is or are resident
within the jurisdiction of such court, or in which the cause of
action has arisen within such jurisdiction and all proceedings
under Chapter LXVIA of the Civil Procedure Code where the
land or any part thereof is situate within the jurisdiction of such
court, and all hypotheary action in which the amount claimed
does not exceed such sum as may be specified in such order, and
the land hypothecated, or any part thereof is situated within the
jurisdiction of such court, and also all actions in which the title
to, interest in, or right to the possession of any land is in dispute,
and all actions for the partition or sale of land:
Provided that the value of the land or the particular share, right,
or interest in dispute or to be partitioned or sold does not exceed
such, sum as may be specified in such Order and the same or any
part thereof is situate within, the jurisdiction of such court, and
shall exercise any other jurisdiction as may be vested in it by any
other law:
Provided always that such court shall not have cognizance of any
action for criminal conversation, or for seduction, or for breach
of promise of marriage, or for separation a menses thorn, or for
divorce, a vineulomatrimonii, or for declaration of nullity of
marriage.
(2) An Order made under subsection (1) shall not have effect
until it is approved by Parliament and notification of such
approval, is published in the Gazette.
Costs2 5. It shall be lawful for the judge of every such court, in pronouncing his judgment or
order in any case, to make such order respecting the payment of costs and expenses as
to him shall appear just and reasonable.
Appeal 26. Any person who is dissatisfied with any final judgment of the Small Claims
[ 9,71 of Court in any action, proceeding or matter or an order having the effect of a final
1981]
judgment of such court may, (except where such right is expressly disallowed) appeal
to the High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution for the province in
which such Small Claims Court is situated, against any such judgment or order, with,
the leave of such Small Claims Court or where such leave is refused, with the leave
of such High Court. The High Court may in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction
in respect of such judgments or orders, affirm, reverse, modify or correct any such
order or judgment according to law or may give directions to the Small Claims Court
from which the appeal has been preferred or order a new trial or further hearing, on
such terms as such High Court shall think fit.
Where defence or 27. Where in any proceeding before any Small Claims Court any
claim in reconvention defence or claim in reconvention of the defendant involves matter
is beyond jurisdiction beyond the jurisdiction of the Court, such defence or claim in
of court. reconvention shall not affect the competence or duty of the Court to
dispose of the matter in controversy in so far as it relates to the
demand of the plaintiff and the defence thereto and the claim in re-
convention: Provided that in such case it shall be lawful for the Court
of Appeal or any Judge thereof, if it shall be thought fit, on the
application of any party to the proceeding, to order that the whole
proceeding be transferred from the court in which it is instituted to
some court having jurisdiction over the whole matter in controversy
and in such case the record in such proceeding shall be transmitted by
the Registrar of the Court to the court to which by such order the
proceeding is so transferred and the same shall thenceforth be
continued and proceeded in such, court as if it had been originally
commenced therein.
Judge of Small 28. The Judge of every Small Claims Court shall conform to and
Claims Court to execute all such judgments, orders, and decrees of the Supreme Court or
execute judgments, Court of Appeal or High Court established by Article 154P of the
&. in appeal. Constitution as shall be made and pronounced in any appeal, in like
manner as any original judgment or order pronounced by the said Judge
could or might have been executed.
Where value of 29. Where there is evidence that the value of any action filed in any
action is beyond Small Claims Court is over the monetary jurisdiction of that Court, the
jurisdiction of court. Judge shall make order accordingly and shall record such fact and
[4,37 of 1979] thereupon the action shall stand removed to the appropriate District
[ 10,71 of 1981] Court.
Amicable 30. It shall be the duty of the Judge of the Small Claims Court by all lawful
settlement. means to endeavor to bring the parties to an amicable settlement where
[4,37 of 1979] appropriate and to remove, with their consent, the real cause of grievance it
any, between them.
CHAPTER VI
MAGISTRATES' COURTS
Powers and 30. Every Magistrates Court shall have and exercise all powers and authorities
jurisdiction. and perform all duties which Magistrates' Courts are empowered and required
to have, exercise and perform by virtue of the provisions of the Penal Code or
of the law relating to criminal procedure or of any other enactment for the time
being in force in any way empowering or requiring them in that behalf. For the
purposes of this section "law relating to criminal procedure " shall mean the
Code of Criminal Procedure Act.
Right of 31. Any party aggrieved by any conviction, sentence or order entered or imposed
appeal. by a Magistrate's Court may subject to the provisions of any law appeal therefrom
to the Court of Appeal in accordance with any law, regulation or rule governing the
procedure and manner for so appealing.
CHAPTER VII
PRIMARY COURTS (Repealed)
[ 14,16 of 1989] 32-36)
CHAPTER VIII
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Right of appeal 37. There shall be a right of appeal to the Supreme Court in accordance with
to the Supreme the provisions of the Constitution and of any other law from any judgment or
Court. order of the Court of Appeal in any appeal from the High Court, the District
[ 15,16 of 1989] Courts, the Small Claims Courts or the Magistrates' Courts.
Courts of First 38. Every Court of First Instance shall in all cases of appeal from such
Instance to execute court to the Court of Appeal and to the Supreme Court conform to and
judgments &c in execute all such judgments, orders and decrees of the Court of Appeal
appeal. and the Supreme Court, as the case may be, as shall be made and
pronounced in such appeal in like manner as though such judgment, order
or decree was made and pronounced by such Court of First Instance-
Objection to 39. Whenever any defendant or accused party shall have pleaded in any
jurisdiction. action, proceeding or matter brought in any Court of First Instance neither
party shall afterwards be entitled to object to the jurisdiction of such court, but
such court shall be taken and held to have jurisdiction over such action,
proceeding or matter:
Provided that where it shall appear in the course of the proceedings that the action,
proceeding or matter was brought in a court having no jurisdiction intentionally and with
previous knowledge of the want of jurisdiction of such court, the Judge shall be entitled at his
discretion to refuse to proceed further with the same, and to declare the proceedings null and
void.
Attorneys 40.
at-law.
(1) The Supreme Court may in accordance with rules for the time
being in force admit and enrol as attorneys-at-law persons of good
repute and of competent knowledge and ability.
(2) When any order has been duly made for the admission of any
person as an attorney-at-law of the Supreme Court the Registrar of
the Supreme Court shall and he is hereby required at the time of such
admission to issue and deliver to such person so admitted a writing
under the hand of such Registrar and the seal of the said court
certifying the admission of such person as an attorney-at-law as
aforesaid and the stamp duty specified in item 1 of Part V of
Schedule A to the Stamp Ordinance shall be payable on such
admission.
(3) The provisions of subsection (2) relating to stamp duty shall be
deemed to have come into force on January 1, 1974.
Right of 41.
representation.
(1) Every attorney-at-law shall be entitled to assist and advise
clients and to appear, plead or act in every court or other
institution established by law for the administration of justice
and every person who is a party to or has or claims to have the
right to be heard in any proceeding in any such court or other
such institution shall be entitled to be represented by an
attorney-at-law.
(2) Every person who is a party to any proceeding before any
person or tribunal exercising quasi-judicial powers and every
person who has or claims to have the right to be heard before
any such person or tribunal shall unless otherwise expressly
provided by law be entitled to be represented by an attorney-at-
law.
Refusal to admit, 42.
suspension and
removal of (1) The Supreme Court shall have the power to refuse to
attorney-at-law. admit and enrol any person applying to be so admitted and
enrolled as an attorney-at-law and shall if required to do so
by the applicant, assign and declare in open court the reasons
for such refusal.
(2) Every person admitted and enrolled as an attorney-at-law
who shall be guilty of any deceit, malpractice, crime or
offence may be suspended from practice or removed from
office by any three Judges of the Supreme Court sitting
together.
(3) Before any such attorney-at-law shall be suspended or
removed as hereinbefore provided a notice containing a copy
of the charge or charges against him and calling upon him to
show cause within a reasonable time why he should not be
suspended or removed, as the case may be, shall be
personally served on him. If, however, personal service
cannot be effected, the Supreme Court shall order such
substituted service as it may deem fit:
Provided however that every such attorney-at-law may be
suspended by any Judge of the Supreme Court on such cause
as aforesaid pending the final decision of the Supreme Court.
(4) It shall be the duty of the presiding officer of any court or
other tribunal administering justice before which any
attorney-at-law is found guilty of any crime or offence which
may be prescribed to forthwith report such fact to the
Supreme Court which may if it thinks fit suspend such
attorney-at-law from practice pending the final determination
of any appeal from such finding of guilty or a proceeding
under subsection (3) whichever is later.
Inquiry by disciplina ry 43.
committee into alleged
misconduct of (1) Where the Chief Justice or any Judge of the Supreme
attorney-at-law. Court considers it expedient or necessary for the purpose
of enabling the Court to determine whether or not
proceedings should be taken for the suspension from
practice or the removal from office of any attorney-at-taw,
the Chief Justice or any other Judge of the Supreme Court
may by order direct that a preliminary inquiry into any
alleged misconduct of such attorney-at-law shall be held
by a disciplinary committee of the Bar Association of Sri
Lanka constituted in accordance with the succeeding
provisions of this Act.
(2) Nothing in subsection (1) shall be construed as to
require the Supreme Court or any Judge thereof to direct
that a preliminary inquiry be held as therein provided,
before proceedings are taken under section 42 (3) in
relation to any attorney-at-law.
(3) No member of such disciplinary committee, nor the
secretary thereof shall, in respect of any act or thing done
or omitted to be done by him in his capacity as such
member or secretary, be liable to any action, prosecution
or other proceeding in any civil or criminal court.
Disciplinary 44.
Committees.
(1) The Chief Justice shall appoint a panel of not less than fifteen
members of the Bar Association of Sri Lanka for the purposes of
constituting disciplinary committees for holding inquiries
required by the preceding section.
(2) Every person appointed to the panel shall be a member
thereof for a period of three years from the date of his
appointment, unless he is earlier removed therefrom by the Chief
Justice acting in his discretion, or earlier vacates the office by
resignation or by ceasing to be a member of the Bar Association
of Sri Lanka. Every member of the panel who vacates office as
such by effluxion of time shall be eligible for renomination and
reappointment.
(3) Any casual vacancy in the panel may be filled by the Chief
Justice.
(4) Where any inquiry is required under section 43 to be held by a
disciplinary committee, the Chief Justice shall appoint three
persons from amongst the members of the panel to constitute the
disciplinary committee for the purpose of the inquiry, and shall
appoint one of them to be the chairman of the committee.
Justices of the 45.
Peace and
Unofficial (1) The President of the Republic of Sri Lanka, the Speaker of
Magistrates. the Parliament, the Ministers of State and the officers
[ 11,71 of 1981] (whether holding office permanently or temporarily)
[ 16,16 of 1989] enumerated in the Fifth Schedule hereto shall be ex officio
[ 2,29 of 1991] Justices of the Peace for the Republic of Sri Lanka or for such
portion thereof respectively as is indicated in the said
Schedule.
(1A) The Minister may by regulation specify the officers
(whether holding office permanently or temporarily) who
shall be ex officio Justices of the Peace for the Republic of Sri
Lanka or for any portion thereof, respectively, as is indicated
in such regulation.
(2) The Minister may, from time to time by notice published
in the Gazette, appoint such persons as shall be named in such
notice to be Justices of the Peace for the Republic of Sri
Lanka, or for such zones, districts or divisions as to the
Minister shall seem expedient.
(3) The Minister may, from time to time by notice published
in the Gazette, appoint any Justice of the Peace who is an
attorney-at-law to be an Unofficial Magistrate for any judicial
division or divisions, and any Justice of the Peace so
appointed shall have all the powers and authority vested by
this Act in Magistrates' Courts save and except the power and
authority to hear, try and determine any criminal case.
(4) Every Justice of the Peace and every Unofficial Magistrate
appointed under subsections (2) and (3) shall take and
subscribe or make and subscribe an oath or affirmation of
office in such form as may be determined by the Minister
before a Judge of the High Court, District Judge, Judge of the
Small Claims Court or Magistrate, and every such Judge is
empowered and required, upon application on that behalf, to
administer the same and to enter in the records of his court
that the said oath or affirmation was duly administered and
taken by him, and forthwith to transmit a copy of such entry to
the Registrar of the Supreme Court to be entered in the
records of that court.
(5) All persons who on the day preceding the date on which
the provisions of this section are brought into operation were
Justices of the Peace or Unofficial Magistrates respectively
shall continue to hold such office and be deemed to have been
appointed for all purposes under this Act.
Transfer 46.
of cases.
(1) Whenever it appears to the Court of Appeal-
(a) that a fair and impartial trial cannot be had in any
particular court or place; or
(b) that some questions of law of unusual difficulties are
likely to arise; or
(c) that a view of the place in or near which any offence is
alleged to have been committed may be required for the
satisfactory inquiry into or trial of the same ; or
(d) that it is so expedient on any other ground,
the court may order upon such terms as to the payment of costs or
otherwise as the said court thinks fit, for the transfer of any action,
prosecution, proceeding or matter pending before any court to any
other court and accordingly in every such case, the court to which any
such action, prosecution, proceeding or matter is so transferred shall,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this or any other law, take
cognizance of and have the power and jurisdiction to hear, try and
determine such action, prosecution, proceeding or matter, as fully and
effectually to all intents and purposes as if such court had an original
power and jurisdiction.
(2) Every application for transfer of any action, prosecution,
proceeding or matter under this section shall be supported by an
affidavit setting out the grounds on which it is based.
(3) The Court of Appeal, in making an order for transfer under this
section may. if it thinks fit, direct that the court to which such action,
prosecution, proceeding or matter is transferred shall call all or any of
the witnesses who have been examined before the court from which
the transfer is made, and take their evidence afresh.
Power of A ttorney- 47.
General to decide court
or place at which (1) Whenever it appears to the Attorney-General that it is
inquiry or trial should expedient that any inquiry into or trial of any criminal
be held. offence shall be transferred from any court or place, to
any other court or place, it shall be lawful for the
Attorney-General in his discretion by his fiat in writing to
designate such last-mentioned court or place, and such
inquiry or trial shall be held accordingly on the authority
of such fiat which shall be filed of record with the
proceedings in such inquiry or trial so transferred as
aforesaid.
(2) Any person aggreieved by a transfer made under such
fiat of the Attorney-General may apply to the Court of
Appeal, by motion supported by affidavit, setting out the
grounds for such application for retransfer or for transfer
to any other court or place of such inquiry or trial, and the
Court of Appeal may after notice to the Attorney-General,
who shall, if he thinks fit, be heard to show cause against
such motion, if it considers that good cause has been
shown why the application shall be granted, make order
accordingly.
(3) Every person making an application for a transfer
under this Chapter shall give to the Attorney-General and
also to the accused or complainant as the case may be,
notice in writing of such application together with a copy
of the grounds on which it is made. No order shall be
made on the merits of the application unless and until at
least forty-eight hours have elapsed between the receipt of
such notice and the hearing of such application. Every
accused person making an application for a transfer under
the preceding section may be required by the Court of
Appeal, in its discretion, to execute a bond with or
without surety conditioned that he will, if convicted, pay
the cost of the prosecution.
Provision for 48 . In the case of death, sickness, resignation, removal from office,
continuing any case absence from Sri Lanka, or other disability of any Judge before whom
begun before a Judge any action, prosecution, proceeding or matter, whether on any inquiry
becoming disabled. preliminary to committal for trial or otherwise, has been instituted or is
[ 2,27 of 1999] pending, such action, prosecution, proceeding or matter may be
continued before the successor of such Judge who shall have power to
act on the evidence already recorded by his predecessor, or partly
recorded by his predecessor and partly recorded by him or, if he thinks
fit, to re-summon the witness and commence the proceedings afresh :
Provided that where any criminal prosecution, proceeding or matter (except on an inquiry
preliminary to committal for trial) is continued before the successor of any such judge, the
accused may demand that the witnesses be resummoned and reheard.
Provisions for 49.
hearing of cases
where Judge is a (1) Except with the consent of both parties thereto, no Judge
party. shall be competent, and in no case shall any Judge be
[ 17,16 of 1989] compellable, to exercise jurisdiction in any action,
prosecution, proceeding or matter in which he is a party or
personally interested.
(2) No Judge shall hear an appeal from or review any
judgment, sentence or order passed by himself.
(3) Where any Judge who is a party or personally interested, is
a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Court of Appeal, the
action, prosecution, proceeding or matter to or in which he is a
party or is interested, or in which an appeal from his judgment
shall be preferred, shall be heard or determined by some other
Judge or Judges of the said court :
Provided that in every other case some other Judge of the
High Court, the District Court, Small Claims Court and the
Magistrates' Court and Primary Court, as the case may be, of
any adjoining zone, district or division shall have jurisdiction
to hear, try and determine such action, prosecution,
proceeding or matter.
Conviction or 5 0. The alleged commission of a crime or offence, or the conviction or
acquittal no bar to acquittal of any person of a crime or offence, shall not be a bar to a civil
any civil action. action for damages against such person at the instance of any person who
may have suffered any injury, or who may allege that he has suffered an
injury, loss or damage from or by reason of the commission of any such
crime or offence.
In what court offences 51. Where any crime or offence is declared by any written law to
declared punishable by be punishable by such punishment as the court before which a
fines or imprisonment conviction is obtained may impose or by such fine or
generally may be tried. imprisonment as the aforesaid court may impose, such crime or
offence may be tried within the zone, district or division, as the
case may be, in which the crime or offence was committed, in any
court having criminal jurisdiction which the Attorney-General
may elect for the prosecution of such crime or offence, jurisdiction
for such purpose being hereby given to such court. However, the
accused person shall, in case of conviction, receive no larger
amount of fine, or longer term of imprisonment than the court by
which he is tried is empowered to impose in the exercise of its
ordinary Jurisdiction. Such right of electing the court may be
exercised by the Attorney-General, even where the prescribed
maximum punishment exceeds that which a Magistrate's Court of
Primary Court is empowered to impose.
Registrar and 52.
other officers of
Courts of First (1) There shall be appointed to the High Court and to each of
instance. the District Courts, Small Claims Courts and Magistrates'
[ 18,16 of 1989] Courts established under this Act, a Registrar, a Deputy Fiscal
and such other officers as may be necessary for the
administration and for the due execution of the powers and the
performance of the duties of such courts including the service
of process and the execution of decrees of court and other
orders enforceable under any written law.
(2) Subject to the provisions of the Constitution the Registrar
of the High Court shall act under the supervision, direction and
control of the President of the Court of Appeal.
(3) Every Deputy Fiscal appointed to a court shall be
responsible for the service of process issued by that court and
the execution of decrees and orders made by that court and
shall act under the supervision, direction and control of the
fiscal.
Ministerial acts 5 3. During the absence from duty of any ministerial or other officer of any
in absence of court who is authorized or required by law to sign any process of the court or
officers. certificate or other document or execute any instrument or perform any other
specified duty or function, the Judge of the court shall have power to direct
any other officer of the court to sign such process, certificate or document,
execute such instrument or perform such duty or function, and every act
done in that behalf by such officer in conformity with any such direction of
the Judge shall be deemed to be valid and effectual for all purposes.
Injunctions. 54.
[ 19,16 of 1989]
(1) Where in any action instituted in a High Court, District Court or
a Small Claims Court, it appears-
(a) from the plaint that the plaintiff demands and is
entitled to a judgment against the defendant, restraining
the commission or continuance of an act or nuisance, the
commission or continuance of which would produce
injury to the plaintiff;or
(b) that the defendant during the tendency of the action is
doing or committing or procuring or suffering to be done
or committed, or threatens or is about to do or procure or
suffer to be done or committed, an act or nuisance in
violation of the plaintiffs rights in respect of the subject-
matter of the action and tending to render the judgment
ineffectual, or
(c) that the defendant during the pendency of the action
threatens or is about to remove or dispose of his property
with intent to defraud the plaintiff, the Court may, on its
appearing by the affidavit of the plaintiff or any other
person that sufficient grounds exist therefor, grant an
injunction restraining any such defendant from-
(i) committing or continuing any such act or
nuisance;
(ii) doing or committing any such act or
nuisance;
(iii) removing or disposing of such property.
(2) For the purposes of this section, any defendant who shall have by
his answer set up any claim in reconvention and shall thereupon
demand an affirmative judgment against the plaintiff shall be
deemed a plaintiff, and shall have the same right to an injunction as
he would have in an action brought by him against the plaintiff for
the cause of action stated in the claim in reconvention, and the
plaintiff shall be deemed the defendant and the claim in
reconvention the plaint.
(3) Such injunctions may be granted at any time after the
commencement of the action and before final judgment after notice
to the defendant, where the object of granting an injunction will be
defeated by delay, the court may enjoin the defendant until the
hearing and decision of the application for an injunction but for
periods not exceeding fourteen days at a time.
Contempt 55.
proceedings.
[ 20,16 of 1989] (1) Every District Court, Small Claims Court and Magistrates'
Court shall, for the purpose of maintaining its proper authority
and efficiency, have a special jurisdiction to take cognizance of,
and to punish with the penalties in that behalf as hereinafter
provided, every offence of contempt of court committed in the
presence of the court itself and all offences which are committed
in the course of any act or proceeding in the said courts
respectively, and which are declared by any law for the time being
in force to be punishable as contempts of court.
(2) The following sentences of fines or imprisonment as the case
may be, may be imposed on conviction for contempt by the
following courts respectively, namely-
(a) by a District Court fine not exceeding two thousand
five hundred rupees or imprisonment, either simple or
rigorous, for a period not exceeding two years;
(b) by the Small Claims Court and the Magistrate's
Court fine not exceeding one thousand five hundred
rupees or imprisonment either simple or rigorous for a
period not exceeding eighteen months.
Transitional 5 6.
provisions,
(1) All civil actions, proceedings or matters pending in the District
Courts and Magistrates' Courts in respect of matters which by this
Act are within the jurisdiction of a District Court, Family Court or
Primary Court on the day preceding the date on which the
provisions of this section are brought into operation*, shall stand
removed to the appropriate District Court, Family Court or
Primary Court, as the case may be, and such court shall have
jurisdiction to take cognizance of, hear and determine or to
continue and complete the same, and the judgments and orders of
the aforesaid District Courts and Magistrates' Courts delivered or
made before the date on which the provisions of this section are
brought into operation shall have the same force and effect as if
they had been delivered or made by the appropriate District Court,
Family Court or Primary Court, as the case may be :
Provided that any such civil action, proceeding or matter in which
the adducing of evidence has commenced as at the day preceding
the date on which the provisions of this section are brought into
operation* in the District Court or Magistrate's Court, as the case
may be, shall be heard and determined by the said District Court
or Magistrate's Court.
(2) All criminal actions, proceedings or matters pending in any
District Court on the day preceding the date on which the
provisions of this section are brought into operation* shall stand
removed to the High Court, and such court shall have jurisdiction
to take cognizance of, hear and determine or to continue and
complete the same, and the judgments and orders of the aforesaid
District Court delivered or made before the date on which the
provisions of this section are brought into operation* shall have
the same force and effect as if they had been delivered or made by
the High Court:
Provided that any such criminal action, proceeding or matter in
which the adducing of evidence has commenced as at the day
preceding the date on which the provisions of this section are
brought into operation* in the District Court shall be heard and
determined by the said District Court.
(3) All criminal actions, proceedings or matters pending in any
Magistrates Court which by the provisions of this Act are within
the jurisdiction of a Primary Court, on the day preceding the date
on which the provisions of this section are brought into operation*
shall stand removed to the appropriate Primary Court and such
Primary Court shall have jurisdiction to take cognizance of, hear
and determine or to continue and complete the same, and the
judgments and orders of the Magistrate's Court aforesaid delivered
or made before the date on which the provisions of this section are
brought into operation* shall have the same force and effect as if
they had been delivered or made by the appropriate Primary
Court:
Provided that any criminal action, proceeding or matter in which
the adducing of evidence has commenced as at the day preceding
the date on which the provisions of this section are brought into
operation* in the Magistrate's Court shall be heard and determined
by the said Magistrate's Court.
(* 1st July, 1979.)
[ 21,16 of 1989] Repealed
Operation of the 58. Where by v irtue of the provisions of this Act, any area previously
territorial limits and forming part of the jurisdiction of any District Court or Magistrate's
the jurisdiction of Court is excluded therefrom, and any action, proceeding or matter in the
court. court on the day preceding the date on which the provisions of this
section are brought into operation* ceases lobe within the jurisdiction of
that court by reason only of the exclusion of that area, such action,
proceeding or matter may, notwithstanding anything in this Act, be heard
and determined or continued and completed by that court as if such area
had not been excluded from the Jurisdiction of that District Court or
Magistrate's Court, as the case may be.
Court to make 59. If any matter or question of procedure shall arise before any court, in
appropriate orders consequence of the coming into operation of the provisions of this Act, or
in certain matters. in respect of any matter, or question of procedure not provided for by this
Act, the court shall have the power to make such orders and give such
directions as the court considers necessary to prevent injustice and as the
justice of the case may require.
Nomination of 60. The Minister may by regulation with the concurrence of the Chief
courts for special Justice nominate the High Court holden in any specified judicial zone or a
categories of cases. court or courts anywhere in Sri Lanka to hear and determine such
categories of civil or criminal proceedings or any other matters as shall be
specified in such regulation and accordingly such court or courts shall
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this or any other written law
in regard to the territorial limits of the jurisdiction of such courts have
jurisdiction to hear and determine all such proceedings or matters:
Provided that the nomination of any such court or courts shall not affect the jurisdiction of
any other court to hear and determine any such proceedings or matters:
Provided further that until regulations are made under this section all regulations made under
section 46 of the Administration of Justice Law, No. 44 of 1973, + and in force on the 2nd
day of July, 1979, shall, mutatis mutandis, apply. (+ Repealed by section 62 of Act No. 2 of
1978 with effect from 2nd July, 1979.)
Effect of an 60A. For the avoidance of doubts it is hereby declared that where, by reason of
Order under an Order made under section 3, any area of a judicial zone, judicial district or
section 3. judicial division falls into another or new judicial zone, judicial district or
[ 22,16 of 1989] judicial division, the court in which any action, proceeding or matter is pending
on the day immediately preceding the date of such Order, shall have full power
and jurisdiction to carry on and complete such action, proceeding or matter.
Regulations. 61.
1380-17-2005
1380-17-2005 (1) The Minister may make regulations for carrying out or giving
effect to the principles and provisions of this Act and for matters
required by this Act to be prescribed or in respect of which
regulations are authorized by this Act to be made.
(2) Every regulation made by the Minister under subsection (1)
shall be published in the Gazette and shall come into force on the
date of such publication or on such later date as may be specified
in the regulation.
(3) Every regulation shall as soon as convenient after the
publication in the Gazette be brought before Parliament for
approval and any regulation which is not so approved shall be
deemed to be rescinded as from the date of such disapproval but
without prejudice to anything previously done thereunder.
(4) The date on which any regulation is deemed to be so
rescinded shall be published in the Gazette.
Interpretation. 63. + In this Act-
"the. High Court of the Republic of Sri Lanka" shall mean the High Court existing at the date
of enactment of this Act and deemed to have been created and established by Parliament in
terms of Article 105 (2) read with Article 169 (6) of the Constitution;
"District Courts" and "Magistrates' Courts" shall mean the District Courts and Magistrates'
Courts deemed to be created and established by Parliament in terms of Article 105(2) of the
Constitution.(+ Repealed by section 62 of Act No. 2 of 1978 with effect from 2nd July, 1979.
= Section 62, repciling Chapter I of the Administration of Justice Law. No. 44 of 1973, and
the Conciliation Board Act. No, 10 of 195S. with effect from 2nd July. 1979, omitted under
the provisions of the Revision of the Legislative Enactments Act.)
PARLIAMENT OF THE DEMOCRATIC
SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF
SRI LANKA
JUDICATURE (AMENDMENT)
ACT, No. 31 OF 2007
[Certified on 08th August, 2007]
Printed on the Order of Government
Published as a Supplement to Part II of the Gazette of the Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka of August 10, 2007
PRINTED AT THE DEPARTMENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, SRI LANKA
TO BE PURCHASED AT THE GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS BUREAU, COLOMBO 5
Price : Rs. 6.00 Postage : Rs. 5.00
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 31 of 2007 1
[Certified on 08th August, 2007]
L.D.—O. 11/2007.
AN ACT TO AMEND THE JUDICATURE ACT, NO. 2 OF 1978
BE it enacted by the Parliament of the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka as follows :—
1. This Act may be cited as the Judicature (Amendment) Short title and
Act, No. 31 of 2007 and shall come into operation on such date of opera-
tion.
date as the Minister may appoint by Order published in the
Gazette.
2. Section 4 of the Judicature Act, No. 2 of 1978 is Amendment of
hereby amended by the substitution for the words “not more section 4 of Act
than forty Judges.” of the words “not more than sixty Judges.”. No.2 of 1978.
3. In the event of any inconsistency between the Sinhala Sinhala text to
and Tamil texts of this Act, the Sinhala text shall prevail. prevail in case of
inconsistency.
2 —PL 002161—4,350 (06/2007)
Annual subscription of English Bills and Acts of the Parliament Rs. 885 (Local), Rs. 1,180
(Foreign), Payable to the SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS BUREAU, DEPARTMENT OF
GOVERNMENT INFORMATION, NO. 163, KIRULAPONA AVENUE, POLHENGODA, COLOMBO 05 before
15th December each year in respect of the year following.
PARLIAMENT OF THE DEMOCRATIC
SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF
SRI LANKA
—————————
JUDICATURE (AMENDMENT)
ACT, No. 10 OF 2010
—————————
[Certified on 18th August, 2010]
Printed on the Order of Government
—————————
Published as a Supplement to Part II of the Gazette of the Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka of August 20, 2010
PRINTED AT THE DEPARTMENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, SRI LANKA
TO BE PURCHASED AT THE GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS BUREAU, COLOMBO 5
Price : Rs. 1.50 Postage : Rs. 5.00
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 10 of 2010 1
[Certified on 18th August, 2010]
L. D. —O. 17/2010.
AN ACT TO AMEND THE JUDICATURE ACT, NO. 2 OF 1978
Be it enacted by the Parliament of the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka as follows:—
1. This Act may be cited as the Judicature (Amendment) Short title and
Act, No. 10 of 2010 and shall come into operation on such date of
date as the Minister may, by Order published in the Gazette operation.
appoint.
2. Section 4 of the Judicature Act, No. 2 of 1978 is Amendment of
hereby amended in paragraph (a) of that section, by the section 4 of Act
No. 2 of 1978.
substitution for the words “not more than sixty Judges,” of
the words “not more than seventy-five Judges,”.
3. In the event of any inconsistency between the Sinhala Sinhala texts to
and Tamil texts of this Act, the Sinhala text shall prevail. prevail in case
of inconsistency.
2—PL 005076—4,140 (07/2010)
2 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 10 of 2010
Annual subscription of English Bills and Acts of the Parliament Rs. 885 (Local), Rs. 1,180
(Foreign), Payable to the SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS BUREAU, DEPARTMENT OF
GOVERNMENT INFORMATION, NO. 163, KIRULAPONA MAWATHA, POLHENGODA, COLOMBO 05 before 15th
December each year in respect of the year following.
PARLIAMENT OF THE DEMOCRATIC
SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF
SRI LANKA
JUDICATURE (AMENDMENT)
ACT, No. 26 OF 2017
[Certified on 17th of November, 2017]
Printed on the Order of Government
Published as a Supplement to Part II of the Gazette of the Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka of November 17, 2017
PRINTED AT THE DEPARTMENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, SRI LANKA
TO BE PURCHASED AT THE GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS BUREAU, COLOMBO 5
Price : Rs. 4.00 Postage : Rs. 10.00
This Act can be downloaded from www.documents.gov.lk
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 26 of 2017 1
[Certified on 17th of November, 2017]
L.D.—O. 32/2017
AN ACT TO AMEND THE JUDICATURE ACT, NO. 2 OF 1978
BE it enacted by the Parliament of the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka as follows:—
1. This Act may be cited as the Judicature (Amendment) Short title.
Act, No. 26 of 2017.
2. Section 4 of the Judicature Act, No. 2 of 1978 is hereby Amendment of
amended by the repeal of paragraph (a) of that section and section 4 of Act,
No. 2 of 1978.
the substitution therefor of the following paragraph:—
“(a) not less than ten and not more than one hundred
and ten judges, each of whom shall be known as a
“Judge of the High Court”;”.
3. In the event of any inconsistency between the Sinhala Sinhala text to
and Tamil texts of this Act, the Sinhala text shall prevail. prevail in case of
inconsistency.
PL 010310— 2962 (9/2017)
2 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 26 of 2017
PARLIAMENT OF THE DEMOCRATIC
SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF
SRI LANKA
JUDICATURE (AMENDMENT)
ACT, No. 9 OF 2018
[Certified on 15th of May, 2018]
Printed on the Order of Government
Published as a Supplement to Part II of the Gazette of the Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka of May 18, 2018
PRINTED AT THE DEPARTMENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, SRI LANKA
TO BE PURCHASED AT THE GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS BUREAU, COLOMBO 5
Price : Rs. 16.00 Postage : Rs. 10.00
This Act can be downloaded from www.documents.gov.lk
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 9 of 2018 1
[Certified on 15th of May, 2018]
L. D.—O. 59/ 2017
AN ACT TO AMEND THE JUDICATURE ACT, NO. 2 OF 1978
BE it enacted by the Parliament of the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka as follows:—
1. This Act may be cited as the Judicature (Amendment) Short title.
Act, No. 9 of 2018.
2. Judicature Act , No. 2 of 1978 (hereinafter referred Insertion of new
to as the “principal enactment”) is hereby amended by the sections12A, 12B
insertion immediately after section 12 thereof, of the and 12C in Act, No.
2 of 1978.
following new sections which shall have effect as sections
12A, 12B and 12C of that enactment:—
“Jurisdiction 12A. (1) (a) Notwithstanding anything in
of the High any other written law, the High Court
Court
established by Article 154P of the Constitution
established
for a Province shall, in terms of sub-paragraph
under Article
154P of the (c) of paragraph (3) of Article 154P of the
Constitution Constitution hear, try and determine in the
in respect of manner provided for by written law and
certain
subject to the provisions of subsection (4),
offences.
prosecutions on indictment against any person,
in respect of financial and economic offences
specified in the Sixth Schedule to this Act, and
any other offence committed in the course of
the same transaction of any such offence, with
three Judges sitting together nominated by the
Chief Justice from among the Judges of the
High Court of the Republic of Sri Lanka
(hereinafter referred to as the “Permanent High
Court at Bar”)
(b) The Minister may, with the concurrence
of the Chief Justice increase, by order published
in the Gazette, the number of such Courts of
the Permanent High Court at Bar.
2 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 9 of 2018
(2) (a) Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in any other written law, the
Permanent High Court at Bar shall have
jurisdiction in respect of offences referred to
in subsection (1)–
(i) committed by any person wholly or
partly in Sri Lanka; or
(ii) wherever committed by a citizen of Sri
Lanka in any place outside the territory
of Sri Lanka or on board or in relation
to any ship or aircraft of whatever
category.
(b) For the avoidance of doubt it is hereby
declared that the jurisdiction of any other Court
in respect of the offences referred to in the Sixth
Schedule, shall continue to be in force.
(3)The jurisdiction of such Permanent High
Court at Bar shall–
(a) if such Court is the Court established
for the Western Province, be
exercised by that Court sitting in
Colombo and where necessary in
any other place within the Western
Province, as may be designated by
the Minister by Order published in
the Gazette, with the concurrence of
the Chief Justice; or
(b) if such Court is the Court established
for any other Province, be exercised
by that Court sitting in such place
within that Province, as may be
designated by the Minister by Order
published in the Gazette, with the
concurrence of the Chief Justice.
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 9 of 2018 3
(4) (a) The Attorney General or, the Director
General for the Prevention of Bribery and
Corruption on the direction of the Commission
to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or
Corruption, as the case may be, shall, taking
into consideration–
(i) the nature and circumstances;
(ii) the gravity;
(iii) the complexity;
(iv) the impact on the victim; or
(v) the impact on the State,
of the offence, referred to in subsection (1),
refer the information relating to the commission
of such offence to the Chief Justice for a
direction whether criminal proceedings in
respect of such offence shall be instituted in
the Permanent High Court at Bar.
(b) Where the Chief Justice is of the opinion
that any one or more of the criteria specified in
paragraph (a) has been satisfied in referring
information under that paragraph, he may by
order under his hand direct that the criminal
proceedings in respect of such offence be
instituted in the Permanent High Court at Bar.
(5)Where the Chief Justice so directs, a trial
before such Permanent High Court at Bar shall–
(a) be held upon indictment by the
Attorney General, or the Director
General for the Prevention of
Bribery and Corruption on the
4 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 9 of 2018
direction of the Commission to
Investigate Allegations of Bribery or
Corruption;
(b) be held and concluded expeditiously;
and
(c) unless in the opinion of the Court,
exceptional circumstances exist
which shall be recorded, be heard
from day to day, to ensure the
expeditious disposal.
(6)(a) Where any Judge of the Permanent
High Court at Bar, dies or resigns or requests
to be discharged from hearing the whole or part
of any trial, before or after its commencement,
or refuses or becomes unable to act, or
otherwise ceases to be a Judge of the High
Court, the Chief Justice shall, not later than two
weeks of such death, resignation, discharge,
refusal, inability or other cause, which causes
such Judge to cease to be a Judge of such High
Court, nominate another Judge of the High
Court of the Republic of Sri Lanka in his place,
to hear the whole or any part of such trial.
(b) Where a new Judge has been nominated
under paragraph (a), it shall not be necessary
for any evidence taken prior to such nomination
to be retaken and the Permanent High Court at
Bar shall be entitled to continue the trial from
the stage at which it was immediately prior to
such nomination, subject to the proviso to
section 48 of this Act.
(7) The provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act, No.15 of 1979 and the
Commission to Investigate Allegations of
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 9 of 2018 5
Bribery or Corruption Act, No. 19 of 1994 or
any other written law, shall, mutatis mutandis,
apply to the institution of proceedings and trials
before the Permanent High Court at Bar.
Right of 12B. (1) An appeal from any judgment,
Appeal. sentence or order pronounced at a trial held by
a Permanent High Court at Bar under section
12A, shall be made within twenty eight days
from the pronouncement of such judgment,
sentence or order to the Supreme Court and
shall be heard by a Bench of not less than five
Judges of that Court nominated by the Chief
Justice.
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979 and the
Commission to Investigate Allegations of
Bribery or Corruption Act, No. 19 of 1994, or
of any other written law governing appeals to
the Court of Appeal from judgments, sentences
or orders of the High Court in cases tried
without a Jury shall, mutatis mutandis, apply
to the appeals to the Supreme Court under
subsection (1) from judgments, sentences or
orders pronounced at a trial held before the
Permanent High Court at Bar under section 12A.
(3) Any appeal made under this section shall
be heard and disposed of, expeditiously.
Construction 12C. Where criminal proceedings have been
of written law instituted in terms of subsection (4) of section
in relation to
the offences
12A, in the Permanent High Court at Bar, in
respect of an offence referred to in subsection
prosecuted
against, in the (1) of section 12A, a reference to any other court
permanent in the relevant law, shall be deemed to be a
High Court at
reference to the Permanent High Court at Bar,
Bar.
with effect from the date on which the
indictment is filed in the Permanent High Court
at Bar.”.
6 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 9 of 2018
Amendment of 3. Section 63 of the principal enactment is hereby
section 63 of the amended by the insertion immediately after the definition of
principal
the expressions “District Courts” and “Magistrate Courts”
enactment.
of the following definition:—
““Commission to Investigate the Allegations of
Bribery or Corruption” means the Commission
to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or
Corruption established under section 2 of the
Commission to Investigate Allegations of
Bribery or Corruption Act, No. 19 of 1994;
“Director General for the Prevention of Bribery and
Corruption” means the Director General for the
Prevention of Bribery and Corruption appointed
under section 16 of the Commission to
Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption
Act, No. 19 of 1994;”.
Addition of the 4. The principal enactment is hereby amended by the
Sixth Schedule in addition immediately after the Fifth Schedule thereof , of the
the principal
following Schedule:-
enactment.
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 9 of 2018 7
“SIXTH SCHEDULE
[section 12A (1)]
Column I Column II
The law Section and the offence
Penal Code 366 - Theft.
(Chapter 19)
386 - Dishonest misappropriation of
Property.
387 - Dishonest misappropriation of
property possessed by a deceased
person at the time of his death.
388 - Criminal breach of trust.
390 - Criminal breach of trust by a carrier.
391 - Criminal breach of trust by a clerk or
Servant.
392 - Criminal breach of trust by public
servant, or by banker, merchant, or
agent.
392A- Criminal breach of a trust by public
servant in respect of money or balance
of money.
392B- Criminal breach of trust by agent in
respect of postal articles.
394 - Dishonestly receiving stolen property.
395 - Habitually dealing in stolen property.
396 - Assisting in concealment of stolen
property.
398 - Cheating.
399 - Cheating by personation.
401 - Cheating with knowledge that
wrongful loss may be thereby caused
to a person whose interest the offender
is bound to protect.
8 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 9 of 2018
403 - Cheating and dishonestly inducing a
delivery of property.
404 - Dishonest or fraudulent removal or
concealment of property to prevent
distribution among creditors.
405 - Dishonestly or fraudulently preventing
from being made available for his
creditors a debt or demand due to the
offender.
406 - Dishonest or fraudulent execution of
deed of transfer containing a false
statement of consideration.
407 - Dishonest or fraudulent removal or
concealment of property or release of
claim.
452 - Forgery.
453 - Making a false document.
455 - Forgery of a record of a Court of Justice
or of a public register of births,etc.
456 - Forgery of a valuable security or will.
457 - Forgery of the purpose of cheating.
459 - Using as genuine a forged document.
460 - Making or possessing a counterfeit
seal, plate, and etc, with intent to
commit a forgery punishable under
section 456.
461 - Making or possessing a counterfeit
seal, plate and etc. with intent to
commit a forgery punishable
otherwise.
462 - Having possession of a forged record
or valuable security or will, known
to be forged, with intent to use it as
genuine.
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 9 of 2018 9
463 - Counterfeiting a device or mark used
for authenticating documents
described in section 456 or
possessing counterfeit
marked material.
464 - Counterfeiting a device or mark used
for authenticating documents other
than those described in section 456,
or possessing counterfeit marked
material.
467 - Falsification of accounts.
468 - Possession of any imitation of any
currency note, bank note or coin.
100, - Conspiracy and Abetment to
101, commit the offences of the Penal
101A, Code setout in this Schedule.
102,
113A,
113B
Prevention 3 - Offence of Money Laundering.
of Money
Laundering
4 - An act amounting to an Offence
Act, No. 5 of
under this section.
- Conspiracy and Abetment to
commit the offences under the
Prevention of Money Laundering
Act, No. 5 of 2006 set out in this
Schedule.
Bribery Act 14 - Bribery of Judicial Officers and
(Chapter 26) Members of Parliament.
15 - Acceptance of gratification by
Members of Parliament for
interviewing public officers.
16 - Bribery of police officers, peace
officers and other public officers.
17 - Bribery for giving assistance or using
influence in regard to contracts.
18 - Bribery for procuring withdrawal of
tenders.
10 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 9 of 2018
19 - Bribery in respect of government
business.
20 - Bribery in connection with payment
of claims, appointments,
employments, grants, leases, and
other benefits.
21 - Bribery of public officers by persons
having dealings with the
Government.
22 - Bribery of member of local authority,
or of scheduled institution, or of
governing body of scheduled
institution, and bribery of officer or
employee of local authority or such
institution.
23 - Use of threats or fraud to influence
vote of member of local authority, or
of scheduled institution, or of
governing body of scheduled
institution.
23A - To own or to have owned property
deemed under this section to be
property acquired by bribery or
property to which property
acquired by bribery has or had been
converted.
24 - Accept of gratification.
25 - Attempt to commit and abetment of
an offence under Part II of the Bribery
Act.
70 - Corruption.
- Conspiracy and Abetment to commit
the offences under the Bribery Act,
set out in this Schedule.
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 9 of 2018 11
Offences Against 3 - Theft of public property.
Public Property Act,
No. 12 of 1982 5 - Dishonest misappropriation,
criminal breach of trust, cheating,
forgery and falsification
of Accounts.
- Conspiracy and Abetment to
commit the offences under the
offences against Public Property
Act, set out in this
Schedule.
Convention on the 3 - offences under the Convention on
Suppression of the Suppression of Terrorist
Terrorist Financing Act.
Financing Act, No.
25 of 2005 - Conspiracy and Abetment to
commit the offences under the
Convention on the Suppression of
Terrorist Financing Act set out in
this Schedule.
Banking Act, Any act constituting an offence under
No. 30 of 1988 Banking Act.
Registered Stocks Any act constituting an offence under
and Securities Registered Stocks and Securities Ordinance.
Ordinance
(Chapter 420)
Local Treasury Any act constituting an offence under
Bills Act (Chapter Local Treasury Bills Act.
417)
Securities and Any act constituting an offence under
Exchange Securities and Exchange Commission of
Commission of
Sri Lanka Act.
Sri Lanka Act,
No. 36 of 1987
Regulation of Any act constituting an offence under
Insurance Industry Regulation of Insurance Industry Act.
Act, No. 43 of 2000
Finance Business Any act constituting an offence under
Act, No.42 of Finance Business Act.
12 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 9 of 2018
Payment Devices Any act constituting an offence under
and Frauds Act, Payment Devices and Frauds Act.
No. 30 of 2006
Computer Crime Any act constituting an offence under
Act, No. 24 of Computer Crime Act.
Offences under any law for the time being in force relating to
transnational organized crime.”.
Sinhala text to 5. In the event of any inconsistency between the
prevail in case of Sinhala and Tamil texts of this Act, the Sinhala text shall
inconsistency.
prevail.
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 9 of 2018 13
English Acts of the Parliament can be purchased at the “PRAKASHANA PIYASA”, DEPARTMENT OF
GOVERNMENT PRINTING, NO. 118, DR. DANISTER DE SILVA MAWATHA, COLOMBO 8.
PARLIAMENT OF THE DEMOCRATIC
SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF
SRI LANKA
JUDICATURE (AMENDMENT)
ACT, No. 5 OF 2019
[Certified on 05th of April, 2019]
Printed on the Order of Government
Published as a Supplement to Part II of the Gazette of the Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka of April 05, 2019
PRINTED AT THE DEPARTMENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, SRI LANKA
TO BE PURCHASED AT THE GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS BUREAU, COLOMBO 5
Price : Rs. 8.00 Postage : Rs. 15.00
This Act can be downloaded from www.documents.gov.lk
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 5 of 2019 1
[Certified on 05th of April, 2019]
L. D.—O. 33/ 2017
AN ACT TO AMEND THE JUDICATURE ACT, NO. 2 OF 1978
BE it enacted by the Parliament of the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka as follows:—
1. This Act may be cited as the Judicature (Amendment) Short title.
Act, No. 5 of 2019.
2. Section 45 of the Judicature Act, No. 2 of 1978 is Amendment of
hereby amended as follows:— section 45 of Act,
No. 2 of 1978.
(i) by the repeal of subsection (2) of that section and
the substitution therefor of the following new
subsection:—
“(2)The Minister may, from time to time
by notice published in the Gazette, appoint
such persons as shall be named in such notice
to be Justices of the Peace for the Republic of
Sri Lanka or for any administrative district as
to the Minister shall seem expedient:
Provided however, where any appointment
of any Justice of the Peace has been made
prior to the date of coming into operation of
this proviso for any zone, district or division,
such appointment shall be deemed to have
been made for the relevant administrative
district containing the Divisional Secretary’s
Division within which the residence of such
Justice of the Peace was situated at the time
of appointment for such zone, district or
division.”;
2 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 5 of 2019
(ii) by the insertion of the following new subsection
immediately after subsection (2):—
“(2A) For the purposes of this section
“administrative district” shall mean an
administrative district established under the
Administrative Districts Act (Chapter 392).”;
(iii) by the insertion of the following subsection
immediately after subsection (5):—
“(6) The Minister may make regulations for
the suspension, cancellation and termination of
office of a Justice of the Peace.”.
Sinhala text to 3. In the event of any inconsistency between the Sinhala
prevail in case of and Tamil texts of this Act, the Sinhala text shall prevail.
inconsistency.
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 5 of 2019 3
English Acts of the Parliament can be purchased at the “PRAKASHANA PIYASA”, DEPARTMENT OF
GOVERNMENT PRINTING, NO. 118, DR. DANISTER DE SILVA MAWATHA, COLOMBO 8.
PARLIAMENT OF THE DEMOCRATIC
SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF
SRI LANKA
JUDICATURE (AMENDMENT) ACT, No. 4 OF 2022
[Certified on 17th of February, 2022]
Printed on the Order of Government
Published as a Supplement to Part II of the Gazette of the Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka of February 18, 2022
PRINTED AT THE DEPARTMENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, SRI LANKA
TO BE PURCHASED AT THE GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS BUREAU, COLOMBO 5
Price : Rs. 9.00 Postage : Rs. 15.00
This Act can be downloaded from www.documents.gov.lk
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 4 of 2022 1
[Certified on 17th of February, 2022]
L. D.–O. 20/2020
AN ACT TO AMEND THE JUDICATURE ACT, NO. 2 OF 1978
BE it enacted by the Parliament of the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka as follows:–
1. This Act may be cited as the Judicature (Amendment) Short title
Act, No. 4 of 2022.
2. Section 5C of the Judicature Act, No. 2 of 1978 is Replacement of
hereby repealed and the following section is substituted section 5C of Act,
No. 2 of 1978
therefor:–
“Appointment 5C. (1) The Judicial Service Commission
of the shall appoint a judicial officer from among the
Recorder District Judges and Magistrates, to be called
Judge
the Recorder Judge, to any High Court
exercising criminal jurisdiction, where such
Commission is of the opinion that such
appointment is required.
(2) The Judge of such High Court (in this
section referred to as the “Trial Judge”) may
delegate to the Recorder Judge appointed to
such High Court, the power to preside over
pre-trial conferences subject to the provisions
of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15
of 1979.
(3) The Recorder Judge shall attend to and
deal with pre-trial conferences delegated to him
under subsection (2) as specified in section
195A of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act,
No. 15 of 1979 and post-trial matters delegated
to him by the Trial Judge not including
sentencing of an accused, that may arise in the
course of a criminal proceeding.
2 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 4 of 2022
(4) The Trial Judge may refer to the
Recorder Judge any matter of a procedural
nature arising in the course of the proceedings
instituted in that court after the stage referred
to in subsection (3).
(5) The Recorder Judge may, with the
concurrence of the Trial Judge, submit for
determination by the Trial Judge any matter
which may otherwise have been properly dealt
with by him.
(6) The Recorder Judge shall–
(a) sit separately and exercise all
the powers vested in him by
subsection (3);
(b) have the power to do all such acts
connected with or incidental or
ancillary to the exercise of the
powers referred to in subsection (3)
including the maintenance of the
Journals of the Court; and
(c) exercise the powers in relation to
pre-trial conferences as specified in
section 195A of the Code of
Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of
1979 only in respect of matters
where the High Court exercises
criminal jurisdiction in terms of
section 9 and shall not exercise the
powers in respect of matters where
the High Court is called upon to
exercise appellate, revisionary or
writ jurisdiction.”.
Sinhala text to 3. In the event of any inconsistency between the Sinhala
prevail in case of and Tamil texts of this Act, the Sinhala text shall prevail.
inconsistency
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 4 of 2022 3
English Acts of the Parliament can be purchased at the “PRAKASHANA PIYASA”, DEPARTMENT OF
GOVERNMENT PRINTING, NO. 118, DR. DANISTER DE SILVA MAWATHA, COLOMBO 8.
PARLIAMENT OF THE DEMOCRATIC
SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF
SRI LANKA
JUDICATURE (AMENDMENT) ACT, No. 34 OF 2022
[Certified on 17th of November, 2022]
Printed on the Order of Government
Published as a Supplement to Part II of the Gazette of the Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka of November 18, 2022
PRINTED AT THE DEPARTMENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, SRI LANKA
TO BE PURCHASED AT THE GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS BUREAU, COLOMBO 5
Price : Rs. 45.00 Postage : Rs. 15.00
This Act can be downloaded from www.documents.gov.lk
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022 1
[Certified on 17th of November, 2022]
L.D.–O. 45/2021
AN ACT TO AMEND THE JUDICATURE ACT, NO. 2 OF 1978
BE it enacted by the Parliament of the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka as follows: -
1. (1) This Act may be cited as the Judicature Short title and
(Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022. date of
operation
(2) The provisions of this Act shall come into operation
on such date or dates as the Minister may appoint by Order
published in the Gazette.
(3) Different dates may be appointed for bringing into
operation different provisions of this Act.
2. Section 2 of the Judicature Act, No. 2 of 1978, Replacement of
(hereinafter referred to as the “principal enactment”) is hereby section 2 of Act,
repealed and the following section is substituted therefor:- No. 2 of 1978
“The Courts 2. The Courts of First Instance for the
of First administration of justice in the Republic of Sri
Instance Lanka shall be-
(a) the High Court of the Republic of
Sri Lanka;
(b) the High Courts for the Provinces
established by Article 154P of the
Constitution;
(c) the District Courts;
(d) the Family Courts;
(e) the Small Claims Courts;
(f) the Magistrates’ Courts; and
(g) the Primary Courts.”.
2 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022
Replacement of 3. Section 5 of the principal enactment is hereby repealed
section 5 of the
and the following section is substituted therefor: -
principal
enactment
“District 5. (1) There shall be in each judicial district
Courts,
of Sri Lanka a “District Court” which shall be
Family
Courts, Small deemed to be the “Family Court” when
Claims exercising the jurisdiction vested in a Family
Courts,
Court under this Act or any written law, and
Magistrates’
Courts and which shall be deemed to be the “Small Claims
Primary Court” when exercising the jurisdiction vested
Courts
in a Small Claims Court under this Act or any
other written law, and in every judicial division
there shall be a “Magistrate’s Court” and a
“Primary Court” and, each such Court shall be
holden by and before a person to be called the
“District Judge”, “Judge of the Family Court”,
“Judge of the Small Claims Court”,
“Magistrate” and “Judge of the Primary Court”
respectively.
(2) Each Court referred to in subsection (1)
may be held at such convenient place or places
within such judicial district or division, as the
case may be, as the Minister shall, by regulation
from time to time appoint:
Provided that nothing in this section shall
be construed to restrict or curtail the power
possessed by every Judge to hold the Court at
any convenient place within his territorial
jurisdiction.”.
Replacement of 4. Section 5B of the principal enactment is hereby repealed
section 5B of the
and the following section is substituted therefor: -
principal
enactment
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022 3
“Appointment 5B. (1) The Judicial Service Commission
of the Pre- shall appoint a judicial officer from among the
Trial Judge
District Judges and Magistrates to be called
the Pre-Trial Judge, to any one or more Court
of First Instance exercising civil jurisdiction,
where the Judicial Service Commission is of
the opinion that such appointment is required.
(2) The Pre-Trial Judge shall attend to and
deal with pre-trial conferences as specified in
the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code
(Chapter 101) and post-trial matters assigned
by the Judicial Service Commission which
have arisen in the course of a civil proceeding
instituted in the Court to which he is
appointed.”.
5. Section 6 of the principal enactment is hereby amended Amendment of
by the repeal of subsection (1) thereof and the substitution section 6 of the
principal
therefor, of the following: -
enactment
“(1) All District Judges, Judges of the Family
Courts, Judges of the Small Claims Courts,
Magistrates and Judges of the Primary Courts and all
such Additional Judges and Additional Magistrates
of such Courts shall be appointed to their offices by
the Judicial Service Commission.”.
6. Section 8 of the principal enactment is hereby amended Amendment of
by the repeal of subsections (1) and (2) thereof and the section 8 of the
principal
substitution therefor, of the following: -
enactment
“(1) The Judicial Service Commission may
appoint as many additional District Judges,
Additional Judges of the Family Court, Additional
Judges of the Small Claims Court, Additional
Magistrates or Additional Judges of the Primary Court
to the same District Court, Family Court, Small Claims
Court, Magistrate’s Court, and Primary Court
respectively as the occasion may require.
4 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022
(2) Every Additional District Judge, Additional
Judge of the Family Court, Additional Judge of the
Small Claims Court, Additional Magistrate, or
Additional Judge of the Primary Court appointed to
any such Court, shall sit separately and exercise all
the powers and the jurisdiction vested in the District
Court, Family Court, Small Claims Court,
Magistrate’s Court and Primary Court, respectively,
of that district or division, as the case may be, for
which such Additional District Judge, Additional
Judge of the Family Court, Additional Judge of the
Small Claims Court, Additional Magistrate or
Additional Judge of the Primary Court, is so
appointed.”.
Amendment of 7. Section 14 of the principal enactment is hereby
section 14 of the amended by the substitution for the words “the High Court
principal
may”, of the words and figures “the High Court of the
enactment
Republic of Sri Lanka or the High Court for the Province
established by Article 154P of the Constitution may”.
Amendment of 8. Section 15 of the principal enactment is hereby
section 15 of the amended as follows:-
principal
enactment
(1) in paragraph (a) thereof, by the substitution for the
words “by a High Court-”, of the words and figures “by a
High Court of the Republic of Sri Lanka or a High Court for
the Province established by Article 154P of the Constitution-
”; and
(2) in paragraph (b) thereof, by the substitution for the
words “order of the High Court.”, of the words and figures
“order of the High Court of the Republic of Sri Lanka or the
High Court for the Province established by Article 154P of
the Constitution.”.
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022 5
9. Section 16 of the principal enactment is hereby Amendment of
section 16 of the
amended in subsection (1) thereof by the substitution for
principal
the words “of the High Court”, of the words and figures “of enactment
the High Court of the Republic of Sri Lanka or the High
Court for the Province established by Article 154P of the
Constitution”.
10. Section 19 of the principal enactment is hereby Replacement of
section 19 of the
repealed and the following section is substituted therefor: -
principal
enactment
“Jurisdiction 19. Every District Court shall be a court of
of District
record and shall within its district have
Courts
unlimited original jurisdiction in all civil,
revenue, trust, insolvency and testamentary
matters, save and except such of the aforesaid
matters as are by or under Chapter VA of this
Act or by virtue of the provisions of any other
enactment exclusively assigned by way of
original jurisdiction to any other court or vested
in any other authority and in the exercise of
such jurisdiction to impose fines, penalties and
forfeitures and shall, in like manner also have
jurisdiction over the persons and estates of
persons of unsound mind and wards, over the
estates of cestuis que trust and over guardians
and trustees and in any other matter in which
jurisdiction is given to District Court by law.”.
11. Section 19A of the principal enactment is hereby Repeal of
repealed.
section 19A of
the principal
enactment
6 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022
Amendment of 12. Section 23 of the principal enactment is hereby
section 23 of the
amended as follows:-
principal
enactment
(1) in subsection (1) thereof, by the substitution for the
words “the Court of Appeal”, of the words and figures “the
High Court for the Province established by Article 154P of
the Constitution”; and
(2) in subsection (2) thereof, by the substitution for the
words “to the Court of Appeal” and “of the Court of Appeal”,
respectively, of the words and figures “to the High Court for
the Province established by Article 154P of the Constitution”
and “of the High Court for the Province established by Article
154P of the Constitution”.
Replacement of 13. Chapter V of the principal enactment is hereby
Chapter V of the
repealed and the following Chapter is substituted therefor: -
principal
enactment
“CHAPTER V
FAMILY COURTS
Jurisdiction 24. (1) Every Family Court shall be a court
of a District of record and shall have sole original
Court
jurisdiction in respect of matrimonial disputes,
actions for divorce, nullity and separation,
damages for adultery, claims for alimony,
disputes between spouses, parents and children
as to matrimonial property, custody of minor
children, dependants’ claims, guardianship
and curatorship matters, claims in respect of
declaration of legitimacy and, illegitimacy and
marriage, adoption and applications for
amendment of birth registration entries, claims
for seduction and breach of promise of marriage
and such other matters provided for by any
other written law:
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022 7
Provided that anything in the preceding
provisions of this subsection shall not affect
the provisions of the Kandyan Marriage and
Divorce Act (Chapter 113) and the provisions
of the Muslim Marriage and Divorce Act
(Chapter 115).
(2) The Family Court shall also have sole
and exclusive jurisdiction in respect of all
matters specified in subsection (1) and where
reference is made to any court in respect of
such matters in any of the enactments referred
to in the Third Schedule hereto, it shall be
deemed to be a reference to a Family Court:
Provided that this subsection shall have no
application to any offences alleged to have
been committed in violation of the provisions
of any such enactment.
(3) An application for the custody of a minor
child or of the spouse of any marriage alleged
to be kept in wrongful or illegal custody by
any parent or by the other spouse or guardian
or relative of such minor child or spouse shall
be heard and determined by the Family Court;
and such Court shall have full power and
jurisdiction to hear and determine the same
and make such orders both interim and final as
the justice of the case shall require.
Care of 25. The jurisdiction and powers of District
minors, and Courts under section 20 as regards the care and
charge of
custody of persons of unsound mind and
their
property mentally deficient persons and the charge of
their property shall, in like manner and with
the same powers be exercised by a Family Court
8 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022
as regards the care of the persons of minors and
wards and the charge of their property and shall
extend to the charge of the property in Sri
Lanka of minors and wards who are not resident
in Sri Lanka.
Family 26. (1) There shall be for every judicial
Counsellor district an officer who shall be called the
“Family Counsellor”.
(2) Where a dispute in any action in respect
of any matter within the jurisdiction of a Family
Court, or any application for maintenance,
comes up for inquiry or trial before a District
Judge, Judge of the Family Court or Magistrate,
as the case may be, such District Judge, Judge
of the Family Court or Magistrate shall, unless
any party to the action expresses in writing a
desire to the contrary, refer such dispute to a
Family Counsellor, who shall-
(a) make every effort to induce the
parties to settle such dispute; and
(b) submit his report thereon to the
District Judge, Judge of the
Family Court or Magistrate as the
case may be, within such time as
may be specified by such District
Judge, Judge of the Family Court
or Magistrate.
(3) Where any dispute is settled, the terms
of settlement shall be entered, signed by each
party to the dispute and the Family Counsellor,
and be forwarded to the District Judge, Judge
of the Family Court or Magistrate as the case
may be who shall enter such terms of settlement
as a decree of such Court.
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022 9
(4) Where a Family Counsellor is not able
to settle any dispute referred to in subsection
(1), he shall refer such dispute to the District
Judge, Judge of the Family Court or Magistrate
for determination after inquiry or trial.
(5) No District Judge, Judge of a Family
Court or Magistrate shall hold any inquiry or
trial in respect of any dispute, until such
dispute is referred to him by the Family
Counsellor under subsection (4).
Appeals 27. A person who is dissatisfied with a
judgment, decree or order pronounced by the
Family Court after inquiry or trial may, in
accordance with any law, regulation or rule
governing the manner and procedure for
appeals from the District Court, prefer an appeal
therefrom to the High Court for the Province
established by Article 154P of the Constitution
for any error in law or in fact.
Transfer 28. (1) In the event of two or more separate
cases from proceedings or actions being instituted in
one Family
respect of the same or substantially the same
Court to
another and family dispute in more than one Family Court,
consolidation any party to such proceedings or actions may
apply, or any Judge of such Family Court in
which the said proceedings or actions had been
instituted may refer the matter, to the Court of
Appeal which shall, in the exercise of its
powers, as it may deem fit, transfer one or more
of such proceedings or actions to one of the
Family Courts, in which proceedings or actions
have already been instituted by the said parties;
so that, all such disputes may be conveniently
or expeditiously heard and determined in one
Family Court.
10 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022
(2) In the event of there being two or more
proceedings or actions instituted or pending
in the same Family Court as between the same
parties or relating to substantially the same
matter, it shall be competent for the said Court
to direct that such proceedings or actions be
consolidated into a single proceeding, if in the
opinion of the said Court it is convenient to do
so or it be so necessary in the interest of justice
and the expeditious disposal of such matters
in dispute. The Court may, in such an event
make such order or deliver such judgment or
enter such decree from time to time as the
exigencies and justice of the case may require.
Procedure in 29. (1) All proceedings in a Family Court
Family shall be instituted and conducted as
Courts expeditiously as possible in accordance with
such regulations as may be prescribed:
Provided that until such regulations have
been so prescribed, the Family Court shall, as
far as practicable, follow the provisions relating
to summary procedure in the Civil Procedure
Code (Chapter 101).
(2) The provisions of the Adoption of
Children Ordinance (Chapter 61) governing
the institution and conducting of proceedings
under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to
apply to such proceedings that may be
instituted in the Family Court.
(3) All applications for the care and custody
of minor children shall take precedence over
all other matters in every Family Court and
shall, unless exceptional circumstances so
warrant, be heard from day to day to ensure the
expeditious disposal of the same.”.
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022 11
14. The following new Chapter is hereby inserted Insertion of
new Chapter
immediately after Chapter V of the principal enactment and
VA in the
shall have effect as Chapter VA of that enactment: - principal
enactment
“CHAPTER VA
SMALL CLAIMS COURTS
Jurisdiction 29A. (1) Every Small Claims Court shall be
of Small
a court of record and shall have exclusive
Claims
Courts original civil jurisdiction and shall have
cognizance of and full power to hear and
determine all actions specified in the Seventh
Schedule hereto:
Provided however, a Small Claims Court
shall have no jurisdiction or power to hear and
determine any action filed under the provisions
of Chapter LIII of the Civil Procedure Code
(Chapter 101) or action for the recovery of
money to which special provisions are made
under any other written law.
(2) All actions specified in the Seventh
Schedule shall not exceed a sum of rupees one
million and five hundred thousand excluding
interest, or such other amount as may be fixed
by the Minister from time to time, by an Order
published in the Gazette.
(3) An Order made under subsection (2) shall
not have effect, until it is approved by
Parliament and notification of such approval
is published in the Gazette.
12 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022
Procedure 29B. The proceedings before any Small
before the
Claims Court may be taken by the special
Small Claims
Courts procedure for Small Claims Court as provided
in the Small Claims Courts’ Procedure Act,
No. 33 of 2022 and any other written law.
Order 29C. It shall be lawful for the Judge of
respecting
every Small Claims Court, in pronouncing his
payment of
order or judgment in any case, to make such
costs and
expenses order in respect of the payment of costs and
expenses as to him shall appear just and
reasonable.
Appeals 29D. (1) Any person who is dissatisfied
with any judgment pronounced by any Small
Claims Court in any action, proceeding or
matter to which he is a party, may, except where
such right is expressly disallowed, prefer an
appeal therefrom to the High Court for the
Province established by Article 154P of the
Constitution in which such Small Claims Court
is situated for any error in law or in fact.
(2) Any person who is dissatisfied with any
order made by any Small Claims Court in the
course of any action, proceeding, or matter to
which he is or seeks to be a party, may prefer an
appeal to the High Court for the Province
established by Article 154P of the Constitution
in which such Small Claims Court is situated
against such order for the correction of any
error in law or in fact, with the leave of such
High Court first had and obtained.
(3) Any person who is dissatisfied with any
order made by any Small Claims Court setting
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022 13
aside or refusing to set aside the judgment
entered upon default in the course of any
action, proceeding or matter to which he is, or
seeks to be a party, may prefer an appeal to the
High Court for the Province established by
Article 154P of the Constitution in which such
Small Claims Court is situated, for the
correction of any error of law or fact, with the
leave of such High Court first had and obtained.
(4) The provisions of Chapters LVIII, LIX,
LX and LXI of the Civil Procedure Code
(Chapter 101) with reference to appeal and the
stay of execution pending appeal, shall apply
so far as they are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Chapter.
(5) The Judge of every Small Claims Court
shall conform to and execute all such
judgments, orders, and decrees of the Supreme
Court, Court of Appeal or High Court for the
Province established by Article 154P of the
Constitution as shall be made and pronounced
in any appeal, in like manner as any original
judgment or order pronounced by the said
Judge could or might have been executed.
Amicable 29E. It shall be the duty of the Judge of the
settlements Small Claims Court by all lawful means to make
every effort to induce the parties, before or
during the trial, to arrive at a settlement where
appropriate and if the parties agree to a
settlement, the settlement shall be recorded and
signed by the parties and a judgment made in
accordance with the terms as settled.”.
15. Section 31 of the principal enactment is Amendment of
hereby amended by the substitution for the section 31 of the
words “appeal therefrom to the Court of principal
enactment
Appeal”, of the words and figures “appeal
14 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022
therefrom to the High Court for the Province
established by Article 154P of the
Constitution.”.
Insertion of new 16. The following new Chapter is hereby inserted
Chapter VII in immediately after Chapter VI of the principal enactment
the principal and shall have effect as Chapter VII of that enactment: -
enactment
“CHAPTER VII
PRIMARY COURTS
32. (1) Every Primary Court shall, subject
Civil
jurisdiction to the provisions of any other law, have original
civil jurisdiction where the debt, damage,
demand or claim does not exceed one thousand
five hundred rupees and shall also have
jurisdiction in respect of the enforcement of
by-laws of local authorities and matters relating
to the recovery of revenue of such local
authorities.
(2) The Primary Courts shall have no
jurisdiction in respect of the disputes referred
to in the Fourth Schedule hereto, irrespective
of the value of such claim.
Criminal 33. (1) Every Primary Court shall have
jurisdiction exclusive original criminal jurisdiction in
respect of such offences as may, by regulation,
be prescribed by the Minister and the Minister
may, in that regulation specify in the case of
each offence the limitations, restrictions and
conditions in respect of each such offence.
(2) The Primary Courts shall have sole and
exclusive jurisdiction in respect of all offences
alleged to have been committed in violation
of the provisions of any enactment or any
subsidiary legislation made thereunder, in
respect of which jurisdiction is vested in such
Court.
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022 15
(3) Anything in this section shall not preclude
a Magistrate from convicting and passing
sentence on any person found guilty after trial of
any offence specified in subsection (1).
Duty to 34. (1) Where any civil proceeding or matter
conciliate is instituted in a Primary Court, it shall be the
disputes
duty of the Judge of that Primary Court to
summon the parties to appear before him and
wherever appropriate to make every effort to
induce such parties to arrive at a settlement
before proceeding to inquiry or trial. Where
such parties agree to a settlement, such
settlement shall be recorded and signed by the
parties thereto and shall be entered as a decree
of the said Primary Court and be enforceable,
as a decree thereof.
(2) Where any criminal proceeding or matter
is instituted in a Primary Court, it shall be the
duty of the Judge of that Court to summon the
parties concerned to appear before him and
wherever appropriate to induce such parties to
arrive at a settlement. Where such parties agree
to a settlement, such settlement shall be recorded
and signed by the parties concerned and
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any
other law, the offence to which the proceeding
or matter relates shall be compounded.
Appeals 35. (1) Any party aggrieved by any judgment,
order, decree, conviction or sentence, entered
or imposed after inquiry or trial by a Primary
Court may, subject to any law and in accordance
with any law, regulation or rule governing the
procedure and manner for so appealing, prefer
an appeal therefrom to the High Court for the
Province established by Article 154P of the
Constitution for any error in law or in fact:
16 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022
Provided that where there is no such law,
regulation or rule governing the procedure and
manner for so appealing, the provisions relating
to appeals from a Magistrate’s Court shall apply
to an appeal in a criminal matter or proceeding
and the provisions relating to appeals from a
District Court shall apply to an appeal in a
civil matter or proceeding.
(2) No appeal shall lie from any judgment,
order, decree, conviction or sentence entered
or imposed by reason of a settlement of the
dispute between the parties arrived at under
the provisions of this Chapter.
Procedure in 36. All proceedings in a Primary Court shall
Primary
be instituted and conducted as expeditiously
Courts
as possible in accordance with such law as may
be applicable thereto and, if there be no such
law, in accordance with the provisions relating
to summary procedure in the Civil Procedure
Code (Chapter 101) in respect of a civil matter
or proceeding and in accordance with the
provisions relating to summary trials in a
Magistrate’s Court in respect of a criminal
matter or proceeding.”.
Replacement of 17. Section 37 of the principal enactment is hereby
section 37 of the
repealed and the following section is substituted therefor:-
principal
enactment
“Right of 37. There shall be a right of appeal to the
appeal to the
Supreme Court in accordance with the
Supreme
provisions of the Constitution and of any other
Court
law–
(a) from any judgment or order of the Court
of Appeal in any appeal from the High
Cout of the Republic of Sri Lanka or the
High Court for the Province established
by Article 154P of the Constitution; or
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022 17
(b) from any judgment or order of the High
Court for the Province established by
Article 154P of the Constituton in any
appeal from the District Courts, the
family Courts, the Small Claims Courts,
the Magistrates’ Courts or the Primary
Courts.”.
18. Section 38 of the principal enactment is hereby Amendment
amended follows:- of section 38
of the
principal
(1) by the renumbering of that section as subsection
enactment
(1) thereof ; and
(2) by the addition immediately after the renumbered
subsection (1) thereof, of the following subsection:-
“(2) Every Courts of First Instance other than
the High Court for the Province established by
Artcle 154P of the Constitution shall in all cases of
appeal from such Courts of First Instance to the
High Court for the Province established by Article
154P of the Constitution conform to and execute
all such judgments, orders and decrees of the High
Court for the Province established by Article 154P
of the Constitution, as shall be made and
pronounced in such appeal in like manner as though
such judgment, order or decree was made and
pronounced by such Courts of First Instance.”.
19. Section 45 of the principal enactment is hereby Amendment
amended by the repeal of subsection (4) thereof and the of section 45
substitution therefor, of the following: - of the
principal
enactment
“(4) Every Justice of the Peace and every
Unofficial Magistrate appointed under subsections
(2 ) and (3 ) shall take and subscribe or make and
subscribe an oath or affirmation of office in such
form as may be determined by the Minister before a
Judge of the High Court, District Judge, Judge of
the Family Court, Judge of the Small Claims Court,
18 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022
Magistrate, or Judge of the Primary Court and every
such Judge is empowered and required, upon
application in that behalf, to administer the same
and to enter in the records of his court that the said
oath or affirmation was duly administered and taken
by him, and forthwith to transmit a copy of such
entry to the Registrar of the Supreme Court to be
entered in the records of that Court.”.
Amendment of 20. Section 49 of the principal enactment is hereby
section 49 of the
amended by the repeal of the proviso to subsection (3) of
principal
enactment that section and the substitution therefor, of the following:-
“Provided that in every other case some other Judge
of the High Court of the Republic of Sri Lanka, the
High Court for the Province established by Article
154P of the Constitution, the District Court, Family
Court, Small Claims Court, Magistrate of the
Magistrate’s Court and Judge of the Primary Court, as
the case may be, of any adjoining zone, district or
division shall have jurisdiction to hear, try and
determine such action, prosecution, proceeding or
matter.”.
Amendment of 21. Section 52 of the principal enactment is hereby
section 52 of the
amended as follows:-
principal
enactment
(1) in subsection (1) thereof, by the substitution for the
words “to the High Court and to each of the District
Courts, Small Claims Courts and Magistrates’
Courts”, of the words and figures “to the High Court
of the Republic of Sri Lanka, and to the High Court
for the Province established by Article 154P of the
Constitution and to each of the District Courts,
Family Courts, Small Claims Courts, Magistrates’
Courts and Primary Courts”; and
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022 19
(2) in subsection (2) thereof, by the substitution for the
words “Registrar of the High Court”, of the words
and figures “Registrar of the High Court of the
Republic of Sri Lanka and the Registrar of the High
Court for the Province established by Article 154P
of the Constitution”.
22. Section 54 of the principal enactment is hereby Amendment
amended in subsection (1) thereto by the substitution for of section 54
of the
the words “Where in any action instituted in a High Court,
principal
District Court or Small Claims Court, it appears-”, of the enactment
words “Where in any action instituted in a High Court of the
Republic of Sri Lanka, High Court for the Province
established by Article 154P of the Constitution, District
Court, Family Court or Small Claims Court, it appears-”.
23. Section 55 of the principal enactment is hereby Replacement of
repealed and the following section is substituted therefor:- section 55 of the
principal
enactment
“Contempt 55. (1) Every District Court, Family Court,
proceedings Small Claims Court, Magistrate’s Court and
Primary Court shall, for the purpose of
maintaining its proper authority and efficiency,
have a special jurisdiction to take cognizance
of, and to punish with the penalties in that
behalf as hereinafter provided, every offence
of contempt of court committed in the presence
of the court itself and all offences which are
committed in the course of any act or
proceeding in the said court respectively, and
which are declared by any law for the time
being in force to be punishable as contempt of
court.
(2) The following sentences of fines or
imprisonment as the case may be, may be
imposed on conviction for contempt by the
following courts respectively, namely-
20 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022
(a) by a District Court and Family
Court a fine not exceeding two
thousand five hundred rupees or
imprisonment, either simple or
rigorous, for a period not
exceeding two years;
(b) by a Small Claims Court and
Magistrate’s Court – a fine not
exceeding one thousand five
hundred rupees or imprisonment
either simple or rigorous, for a
period not exceeding eighteen
months; and
(c) by a Primary Court – a fine not
exceeding five hundred rupees or
imprisonment, either simple or
rigorous, for a period not
exceeding three months.”.
Insertion of 24. The following new section is hereby inserted
section 57 in the
immediately after section 56 of the principal enactment and
principal
shall have effect as section 57 of that enactment: -
enactment
“Where 57. Where a Judge of a primary Court of any
Judge of a judicial division established under this Act has
Primary
not been appointed, the Magistrate of such
Court is not
appointed division shall be deemed for all purpose to be
and shall exercise all jurisdiction of the Judge
of the Primary Court of such division until a
Judge of such Primary Court is appointed:
Provided that where a Judge of a Primary
Court of such division is appointed, the
Magistrate of such division may hear and
determine all prosecutions, actions,
proceedings or matters in which such
Magistrate has commenced the recording of
any evidence.”.
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022 21
25. The principal enactment is hereby amended by the Addition of the
Third and
insertion immediately after the Second Schedule thereof, of
Fourth
the following new Schedules: -
Schedules to the
principal
“THIRD SCHEDULE enactment
[Section 24(2)]
Enactments
(1) Adoption of Children Ordinance (Chapter 61)
(2) Births and Deaths Registration Act (Chapter 110)
(3) Civil Procedure Code (Chapter 101)
(4) Jaffna Matrimonial Rights and Inheritance Ordinance
(Chapter 58)
(5) Legitimacy Act, No. 3 of 1970
(6) Marriage Registration Ordinance (Chapter 112)
(7) Married Women’s Property Ordinance (Chapter 56)
(8) Matrimonial Rights and Inheritance Ordinance (Chapter 57)
FOURTH SCHEDULE
[Section 32(2)]
Actions excluded from the jurisdiction of Primary Courts
(1) Any action concerning an act or order purporting to be
done or made by the State or concerning an act purporting
to be done by any person by order of the State.
(2) Any action concerning an act purporting to be done by any
person in pursuance of a judgement or order of a court or
of a judicial officer acting in the execution of his office.
(3) Any action concerning any act or order purporting to be
done or made by any officer of the State in his official
capacity.
(4) Any action for the partition or sale of immovable property
under the law relating to partition for the time being in
force.
22 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022
(5) Any action by a mortgagee of immovable property for the
enforcement of the mortgage or for the sale of the property,
or by a mortgagor of immovable property for the redemption
of the mortgage.
(6) Any action to restrain waste.
(7) Any action to recover from a person to whom compensation
has been paid under the Land Acquisition Act (Chapter
460) or Land Reform Law No. 1 of 1972, the whole or any
part of the compensation.
(8) Any action for the specific performance or rescission of a
contract or for damages for breach of contract.
(9) Any action for the rectification or cancellation of an
injunction.
(10) Any action to obtain an injunction.
(11) Any action relating to a trust including an action to make
good out of the general estate of a deceased trustee the loss
occasioned by a breach of trust, and any action by a co-
trustee to enforce against the estate of a deceased trustee a
claim for the contribution.
(12) Any action for a declaratory decree including a decree for
the declaration of title to land.
(13) Any action for a property which the plaintiff has conveyed
while insane or under other incapacity.
(14) Any action to contest an award made by an arbitrator.
(15) Any action upon a foreign judgement as defined in the Civil
Procedure Code (Chapter 101) or upon a judgement
obtained in any court in Sri Lanka.
(16) Any action to compel a refund by a person to whom an
executor or administrator has paid a legacy or distributed
assets.
(17) Any action for a legacy or for the whole or a share of a
residue bequeathed by a testator or for the whole or a share
of the property of an intestate.
(18) Any action-
Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022 23
(a) for a dissolution of partnership or for the winding
up of the business of a partnership after its
dissolution;
(b) for an account of partnership transactions; or
(c) for a balance of partnership-account.
(19) Any action for an account of property administered under
decree or order of any court.
(20) Any other action for an account, including an action by a
mortgagor, after the mortgage has been satisfied, to recover
surplus collection received by the mortgagee, and any action
for the profits on immovable property belonging to the
plaintiff which has been wrongfully received by the
defendant.
(21) Any action for a general average loss or for salvage.
(22)Any action for compensation in respect of collision between
ships.
(23) Any action on a policy of insurance or for the recovery of
any premium paid under any such policy.
(24) Any action for compensation or damages -
(a) for loss resulting from the death of a person
caused by actionable wrong;
(b) for wrongful arrest;
(c) for malicious prosecution;
(d) for wrongful restraint or confinement;
(e) for defamation;
(f) for adultery or seduction;
(g) for breach of contract of betrothal or promise of
marriage;
(h) for inducing a person to break a contract made
with the plaintiff;
(i) for obstruction to or interference with the
enjoyment of any servitude or the exercise of
any right over property.
24 Judicature (Amendment) Act, No. 34 of 2022
(25) Any action by a Muslim for the recovery of Mahr.
(26) Any action for the custody of a minor.
(27) Any action for a divorce or a judicial separation.
(28) Any action relating to maintenance, affiliation or adoption.
(29) Any action for contribution by a sharer in joint property in
respect of a payment made by him of money due from a
co-sharer.
(30) Any action by one of several joint mortgagors of immovable
property for contribution in respect of money paid by him
for the redemption of the mortgaged property.
(31) Any action against the State or a local authority to recover
money paid under protest in satisfaction of a claim made on
account of any tax or rate or other levy.
(32) Any action under the Companies Act, No. 7 of 2007 as
amended from time to time.
(33) Any action relating to trade marks, patents or copyrights
under the Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003.
(34) Any action founded on nuisance.
(35) Any action for rent and ejectment and proceedings under
the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972.
(36) Any action expressly or by implication excluded from the
jurisdiction of Primary Courts by any written law (other
than this Act) for the time being in force.”.
Addition of the 26. The principal enactment is hereby amended by the
Seventh addition immediately after the Sixth Schedule thereof, of
Schedule to the
the following new Schedule: -
principal
enactment
“SEVENTH SCHEDULE [Section 29A(2)]
Actions
1. Any action for the recovery of money (either as a debt or
fee or payment or damage or demand including an action
for the recovery of damages on accident or personal injury
or in any other similar category);
[TRUNCATED: processed first 80 of 82 pages]