PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
CHAPTER 19
PENAL CODE
AN ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE A GENERAL PENAL CODE Ordinances,
Nos. 2 of 1883,
FOR CEYLON. 11 of 1887,
13 of 1888,
13 of 1890,
3 of 1892,
11 of 1895,
15 of 1898,
16 of 1898,
5 of I903,
10 of I903,
12 of 1906,
10 of 1909,
10 of 1910,
26 of 1912,
7 of 1915,
16 of 1918,
21 of 1919,
25 of 1919,
5 of 1924,
19 of 1926,
23 of I937,
29 of 1938,
50 of 1939,
54 of 1939,
62 of 1939,
19 of 1941,
6 of 1944,
12 of 1945,
40 of 1945,
37 of 1946,
Acts,
Nos.
6 of 1968,
50 of 1980,
32 of I991.
22 of 1995,
29 of 1998,
[ Ist January,1885.]
CHAPTER I
1. This Ordinance may be cited as the Penal Code, and is Short title.
generally referred to hereinafter as "this Code".
2. (1) Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Liability for
Code, and not otherwise, for every act or ommission contrary to of fences
committed
the provisions thereof, of which he shall be guilty within Sri
within and outside
Lanka. Sri Lanka,
[§2,32 of 1991.]
[Cap. 19 PENAL CODE
[§2,32 of 1991.] (2) Every Sri Lankan national shall be liable to punishment
under this Code for every act done or omitted to be done contrary
to the provisions thereof, of which he shall be guilty, where such
act was done or was omitted to be done-
(a) within the premises of a Sri Lankan mission or the
residence of the Head of such mission, diplomatic agent
or any other member of such mission, situated outside
the Republic of Sri Lanka; or
(b) within any premises occupied on behalf of or under the
control of the Government of Sri Lanka or any statutory
body established in Sri Lanka, and situated outside the
Republic of Sri Lanka; or
(c) outside the Republic of Sri Lanka, where such Sri Lankan
national enjoys diplomatic immunity in respect of such
act or omission which is granted by a foreign state by
reason of his diplomatic status in such state.
[§2,32 of 1991.] (3) Nothing in this section shall be construed, as affecting
the liability of any Sri Lankan nationality under the laws of the
country in which such act was done or omitted to be done in
respect of such act or omission.
Roman Dutch 3. So much of the Criminal Law heretofore administered in
Criminal Law abolished. Ceylon as is known as "the Criminal Law of the United
Provinces", or as "the Roman-Dutch Law" is hereby abolished.
281A
Certain laws 4. Nothing in this Code is intended to repeal, vary,
not to be
suspend, or effect any of the provisions of any special
affected.
or local law, or to affect the power heretofore pos-
sessed by the Supreme Court or any Judge thereof of
summarily punishing persons guilty of contempts of
the said court, and attorneys-at-law guilty of
misconduct in the exercise of their profession.
CHAPTER II
GENERAL EXPLANATIONS
Definitions to 5. Throughout this Code every definition of an
be understood
offence, every penal provision, and every illustration
subject to
exceptions. of every such definition or penal provision shall be
understood subject to the exceptions contained in
Chapter IV, intituled " General Exceptions", though
these exceptions are not repeated in such definition,
penal provision, or illustration.
Illust rations
[ §2, 50 of 1939] (a) The sections in this Code which contain definitions
of offences do not express that a child under eight
years of age cannot commit such offences; but the
definitions are to be understood subject to the
general exception which provides that nothing
shall be an offence which is done by a child under
eight years of age.
(b) A, a police officer, without warrant, apprehends Z,
who has committed murder. Here A is not guilty
of the offence of wrongful confinement, for he was
bound by law to apprehend Z, and therefore the
case falls within the general exception which pro-
vides that " nothing is an offence which is done
by a person who is bound by law to do it".
Expression 6. Every expression which is explained in any part
once
explained is of this Code is used in every part of this Code in
used in the
same sense conformity with the explanation.
throughout
the Code.
Gender. 7. The pronoun " he " and its derivatives are used
of any person, whether male or female.
8. Unless the contrary appear from the context,
Number.
words importing the singular number include the
plural number, and words importing the plural
number include the singular number.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
9. The word "man" denotes a male human being of any age; "Man"
the word "woman" denotes a female human being of any age. "Woman"
10. The word "person" includes any company or associa- "Person".
tion or body of persons, whether incorporated or not.
11. The word "public" includes any class of the public or "Public"
any community.
*12. The word "Queen" denotes the Sovereign for the time "Queen".
being of Ceylon.
+13. The words "servant of the Queen" denote all officers or "Servant of the
servants employed in Ceylon by or under the Government of Queen".
Ceylon.
+14. The word "Government", where no other meaning is
"Government".
indicated by any descriptive or qualifying words or by the con-
text, and the expression "the Ceylon Government" or "the
Government of Ceylon", shall mean Her Majesty's Govern-
ment in Ceylon established under the Ceylon (Constitution and
Independence) Order in Council, 1946 and 1947.
15. The words "this Island" and "Sri Lanka" denote respec-
"This Island".
tively, the Island of Sri Lanka. "Sri Lanka".
+16. The term "Governor-General" denotes the Governor-
"Govemor-
General and Commander-in-Chief of the Island of Ceylon and
Genaral".
includes the officer for the time being Administering the Gov-
ernment of Ceylon and, to the extent to which a Deputy for the
Governor-General is authorized to act, that Deputy.
‡l7. The word "Judge" not only denotes every person who "Judge"
is officially designated as a judge, but also every person who
is empowered by law to give, in any legal proceeding, civil or
criminal, a definitive judgment, or a judgment which , if not
appealed against, would be definitive, or a judgment which, if
confirmed by some other authority, would be definitive, or
who is one of a body of persons, which body of persons is
empowered by law to give such a judgment.
* Section 12- This definition should be amended to read as 'the word
"President" denotes the head of the Republic of Sri Lanka' (1978
Constitution).
† Section 13- This definition is redundant and needs to be repealed
† Section 14- This definition is redundant and needs to be repealed
† Section 16- This definition is redundant and needs to be repealed
‡There should be substituted for the definition, the definition of
"Judicial officer" in Article 170 of the Constitution of 1978.
[Cap. 19 PENAL CODE
Illustrations
(a) A Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in respect of a charge on
which he has power to sentence to fine or imprisonment is a
judge.
(b)* The President of a Rural Court, when exercising jurisdiction under
the Rural Courts Ordinance, is a judge.
(c) A District Registrar or Additional District Registrar exercising
jurisdiction under section 33 of the Kandyan Marriage and
Divorce Act, is a judge.
(d) A juror at a trial before the High Court is a judge.
(e) A Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in respect of a charge on
which he has power only to commit for trial to another court is
not a judge; but a Magistrate when exercising jurisdiction in
requiring persons to give security to keep the peace, or for good
behaviour, is a judge.
"Court". 18. The word "Court" denote a judge who is empowered
by law to act judicially alone, or a body of judges which is
empowered by law to act, judicially as a body, when such
judge or body of judges is acting judicially.
"Election". 18A. The word "election" denotes any election for any
purpose whatsoever held under or by virtue of any law for
the time being in force in Sri Lanka, or any rules or regulations
made thereunder.
19 †The words "public servant" denote a person falling
"Public servant".
under any of the descriptions hereinafter following, namely:-
Firstly-Every person holding any office in Sri Lanka by
virtue of any commission or warrant granted by the President
or under the President's authority.
Secondly-Every member of the Sri Lanka Administrative
Service.
Thirdly-Every commissioned officer in the naval, military
or air forces of the Republic.
Fourthly-Every judge.
Fifthly-Every officer of a Court whose duty it is, as such
officer, to investigate or report on any matter of law or fact,
or to make, authenticate, or
* Redundant due to repeal of the Rural Courts Ordinance by Law
No. 44 of 1973.
† This definitions should be replaced by the definition of "public officer"
contained in Article 170 of the 1978 Constitution. [See definition at
page 433]
PENAL CODE [Cap.19
keep any document, or to take charge or dispose of any
property, or to execute any judicial process, or to administer
any oath, or to interpret, or to preserve order in the Court, and
every person specially authorized by a Court to perform any of
such duties.
Sixthly—Every juryman or assessor assisting a Court or a
public officer.
Seventhly—Every arbitrator or other person to whome
any cause or matter has been referred for decision or report
by any Court, or by any other competent public authority.
Eighthly—Every person who holds an office by
virtue of which he is empowered to place or keep any
person in confinement.
Ninthly—Every officer of Government whose duty
it is, as such officer, to prevent offences, to give infor-
mation of offences, to bring offenders to justice, or to
protect the public health, safety, or convenience.
Tenthly—Every officer whose duty it is, as such
officer, to take, receive, keep or expend any property
on behalf of Government or to make any survey,
assessment, or contract on behalf of Government, or to
investigate or to report on any matter affecting the
pecuniary interests of Government, or to make,
authenticate, or keep any document relating to the
pecuniary interests of Government, or to prevent the
infraction of any law for the protection of the pecuni-
ary interests of Government, and every officer in the
service or pay of Government or remunerated by fees
or commission for the performance of any public duty.
Eleventhly—Every officer whose duty it is, as such
officer, to take, receive, keep or expend any property,
to make any survey or assessment, or to levy any rate
or tax for any secular common purpose of any village,
town, or district, or to make, authenticate, or keep any
document for the ascertaining of the rights of the
people of any village, town, or district.
Twelfthly—Every person who is empowered to
prepare, publish, maintain, or revise an electoral roll
or to conduct an election or part of an election.
[Cap. 19 PENAL CODE
Illustrations
A Municipal Inspector is a public officer.
A Superintending Engineer, under the Thoroughfares Ordinance, is a
public officer.
A Fiscal is a public officer.
A Grama niladhari is a public officer.
Explanation 1.-Persons falling under any of the above descriptions
are public officers whether appointed by the Government or
not.
Explanation 2.-Wherever the words "public officer" occur, they shall
be understood of every person who is in actual possession of
the situation of a public officer, whatever legal defect there
may be in his right to hold that situation.
"Movable property". 20. The words "movable property" are intended to include
corporeal property of every description, except land and things
attached to the earth or permanently fastened to anything
which is attached to the earth.
"Wrongful gain". 21. (1) "Wrongful gain" is gain by unlawful means of
property to which the person gaining is not legally entitled.
"Wrongful loss". (2) "Wrongful loss" is the loss by unlawful means of
property to which the person losing it is legally entitled.
"Wrongful gain" (3) A person is said to gain wrongfully when such person
includes wrongful retains wrongfully, as well as when such person acquires
retention of property. wrongfully.
"Wrongful loss" (4) A person is said to loss wrongfully when such person
includes the being is wrongfully kept out of any property, as well as when such
wrongfully kept out of person is wrongfully deprived of property.
property.
"Dishonestly". 22. Whoever does anything with the intention of causing
wrongful gain to one person, or wrongful loss to another
person, is said to do that thing "dishonestly".
"Fraudulently". 23. A person is said to do a thing fraudulently if he does
that thing with intent to defraud, but not otherwise.
"Reason to believe". 24. A person is said to have "reason to believe" a thing if
he has sufficient cause to believe that thing, but not otherwise.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
25. When property is in the possession of a person's Property in
possession of
wife, clerk, or servant, on account of that person, it is
wife, clerk, or
in that person's possession within the meaning of this servant.
Code.
Explanation.—A person employed temporarily or on a
particular occasion in the capacity of a clerk or
servant is a clerk or servant within the meaning of
this section.
26. A person is said to " counterfeit" who causes " Counter-
feit " .
one thing to resemble another thing, intending by
means of that resemblance to practise deception, or
knowing it to be likely that deception will thereby be
practised.
Explanation.—It is not essential to counterfeiting that the
imitation should" be exact.
27. The word " document" denotes any matter " Document''.
expressed or described upon any substance by means
of letters, figures,. or marks, or by more than one of
those means, intended to be used, or which may be
used, as evidence of that matter.
Explanation 1.—It is immaterial by what means, or upon
what substance, the letters, figures, or marks are
formed, or whether the evidence is intended for or
may be used in a Court or not.
Illustrations
A writing expressing the terms of a contract, which may
be used as evidence of the contract, is a document.
A cheque upon a banker is a document.
A power of attorney is a document.
A map or plan which is intended to be used, or which
may be used, as evidence is a document.
A writing containing directions or instructions is a
document.
Explanation 2.—Whatever is expressed by means of
letters, figures, or marks, as explained by mercantile
or other usage, shall be deemed to be expressed by
such letters, figures, or marks within the meaning of
this section, although the same may not b eactually
expressed.
Illustrations
A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange paya-
ble to his order. The meaning of the endorsement,
as explained by mercantile usage, is that the bill
is to be paid to the holder. The endorsement is a
document, and must be constructed in the same
manner as if the words " pay to the holder " or words
to that effect, had been written over the signature.
" Valuable 28. The words "valuable security " denote a docu-
security " . ment which is, or purports to be, a document whereby
any legal right is created, extended, transferred,
restricted, extinguished, or released, or whereby any
person acknowledges that he lies under legal liability,
or has not a certain legal right.
Illustration
A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange.
As the effect of this endorsement is to transfer the
right to the bill to any person who may become the
lawful holder of it, the endorsement is a "valuable
security ".
" A will" . 29. The words " a will" denote any testamentary
document.
Words refer- 30. In every part of this Code, except where a
ring to acts contrary intention appears from the context, words
include
illegal which refer to acts done extend also to illegal omis-
sions.
31. (1) The word " act" denotes as well a series of
" Act " .
acts as a single act.
(2) The word " ommission " denotes as well a series
"Omission" .
of omissions as a single omission.
32. When a criminal act is done by several persons
Liability for
act done by in furtherance of the common intention of all, each of
several
such persons is liable for that act in the same manner
persons in
furtherance as if it were done by him alone.
of common
intention.
33. Whenever an act, which is criminal only by
When such an
act is criminal reason of its being done with a criminal knowledge or
by reason of
its being done intention, is done by several persons, each of such
with a persons who joins in the act with such knowledge or
criminal
knowledge or intention is liable for the act in the same manner as
intention. if the act were done by him alone with that knowledge
or intention.
34. Whenever the causing of a certain effect, or an
Effect caused
partly by act attempt to cause that effect, by an act or by an omis-
and partly by
omission. sion, is an offence, it is to be understood that the
causing of that effect partly by an act and partly by
an omission is the same offence.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
Illustration
A intentionally causes Z's death, partly by illegally
omitting to give Z food, and partly by beating Z.
A has committed murder.
35. When an offence is committed by means of Co-operation by
doing one of
several acts, whoever intentionally co-operates in the several acts
constituting an
commission of that offence by doing any one of those
offence.
acts, either singly or jointly with any other person,
commits that offence.
Illustrations
(a) A and B agree to murder Z by severally, and at
different times, giving him small doses of poison.
A and B administer the poison according to the
agreement with intent to murder Z. Z dies from the
effects of several doses of poison so administered to
him. Here A and B intentionally co-operate in the
commission of murder, and as each of them does an
act by which the death is caused they are both guilty
of the offence though their acts are separate.
(b) A and B are joint jailors, and as such have the
charge of Z, a prisoner, alternately for six hours at
a time. A and B intending to cause Z's death,
knowingly co-operate in causing that effect by
illegally omitting each during the time of his
attendance to furnish Z with food supplied to them
for that purpose. Z dies of hunger. Both A and B
arc guilty of the murder of Z.
(c) A, a jailor, has the charge of Z, a prisoner. A
intending to cause Z's death, illegally omits to
supply Z. with food in consequence of which Z is
much reduced in strength, but the starvation is not
sufficient to cause his death A is dismissed from his
office, and B succeeds him. B, without collusion
or co-operation with A, illegally omits to supply Z
with food, knowing that he is likely thereby to
cause Z's death. Z dies of hunger. B is guilty of
murder; but as A did not co-operate with B,
A is guilty only of an attempt to commit murder.
36. Where several persons are engaged or concerned Several
persons
in the commission of a criminal act, they may be
engaged in
guilty of different offences by means of that act. the commis-
sion of a
criminal act
Illustration may be guilty
of different
A attacks Z under such circumstances of grave provo-
offences.
cation that his killing of Z would be only culpable
homicide not amounting to murder. B, having ill-
will towards Z, and intending to kill him, and not
having been subject to the provocation, assists A in
killing Z. Here, though A and B are both engaged
in causing Z's death, B is guilty of murder, and A is
guilty only of culpable homicide.
37. A person is said to cause an effect " voluntarily " " Voluntarily ".
when he causes it by means whereby he intended to
cause it, or by means which, at the time of employing
those means, he knew or had reason to believe to be
likely to cause it.
Illustration
A sets fire. by night, to an inhabited house in a large
town for the purpose of facilitating a robbery, and
thus causes the death of a person. Here A may not
have intended to cause death, and may even be sorry
that death has been caused by his act, yet, if he knew
that he was likely to cause death, he has caused
death voluntarily.
" Offence ". 38. (1) Except in the Chapter and sections
mentioned in subsections (2) and (3), the word
" offence " denotes a thing made punishable by this
Code.
(2) In Chapter IV, and in the following sections,
namely, sections 67, 100, 101, 101A, 102, 103, 105, 107,
108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 113A 113B, 184, 191, 192,
200, 208, 210, 211, 216, 217, 218, 219, 220, 318, 319, 320,
321, 322, 338, 339, 377, 378, and 431, the word " offence "
denotes a thing punishable in Sri Lanka under this Code,
or under any law other than this Code.
(3) And in sections 138, 174, 175, 198, 199, 209, 213,
and 427, the word " offence " has the same meaning as
in subsection (2) when the thing punishable under any
law other than this Code is punishable under such law
with imprisonment for a term of six months or
upwards, whether with or without fine.
"Spec ial law". 39. A " special law" is a law applicable to a
particular subject.
40. A "local law" is a law applicable only to a
" Local law ".
particular part of Sri Lanka.
41. The words "illegal" and "illegally" are
" Illegal " .
" Illegally ". applicable to everything which is an offence, or which
is prohibited by law, or which furnishes ground for a
civil action.
42. A person is said to be "legally bound to do"
" Legally
bound to do ". whatever it is illegal in him to omit.
PENAL CODE [Can. 19
43. The word "injury " denotes any harm whatever " Injury " .
illegally caused to any person in body, mind,
reputation, or property.
44. The word " life " denotes the life of a human " Life " .
being, unless the contrary appear from the context.
45. The word " death "denotes the death of a human " Death " .
being, unless the contrary appear from the context.
46. The word " animal" denotes any living creatu re " Animal" .
other than a human being, unless the contrary appear
from the context.
47. The word " vessel" denotes anything made for " Vessel ".
the conveyance by water of human beings or of
property.
48. Wherever the word " year" or the word " Year "
" month " is used, it is to be understood that the year or " Month ".
the month is to be reckoned according to the calendar.
49. The word " section " denotes one of those por- " Section ".
tions of a Chapter of this Code which are distinguished
by prefixed numeral figures.
50. The word "oath " includes a solemn affirmation " Oath ".
substituted by law for an oath, and any declaration
required or authorized by law to be made before a
public officer, or to be used for the purpose of pro of,
whether in a Court or not.
51. Nothing is said to be done or believed in good "Good faith".
faith which is done or believed without due care and
attention.
CHAPTER III
OF PUNISHMENTS
52. The punishments to which offender are liable Punishments.
under the provisions of this Code are—-
Firstly—Death.
Secondly—Imprisonment, which is of two descrip-
tions, namely—
(a) rigorous, that is, with hard labour;
(b) simple.
Thirdly—Whipping.
Fourthly—Forfeiture of property.
Fifthly—Fine.
Punishment 53. Sentence of death shall not be pronounced on
of detention
or recorded against any person who, in the opinion of
in lieu of death
for persons the court, is under the age of eighteen, years ; but, in lieu
under eighteen
of that punishment, the court shall sentence such
years of age.
person to be detained during the President's pleasure.
[§ 2, 50 of 1980.]
54. Sentence of death shall not be pronounced on or
Punishment of
impr isonment recorded against any woman who is found in accordance
in lieu of death
for pregnant with the provisions of section 282 of the Code of Criminal
women. Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979, to be pregnant at the time
of her conviction; but, in lieu of that punishment, the court
shall sentence her to imprisonment of either description
for life or for any other term.
Sentences may 55. *In every case in which an offender is punishable
be (in certain
with imprisonment which may be of either description,
cases of impri-
sonment) it shall be competent for the court which sentences
wholly or partly
such offender to direct in the sentence that such
rigorous or
simple. imprisonment shall be wholly rigorous, or that such
imprisonment shall be wholly simple, or that any part
of such imprisonment shall be rigorous and the rest
simple.
Sentence of 56. In every case in which a person is convicted of
forfeiture of
property. an offence for which he is liable to forfeiture of all his
property, the offender shall be incapable of acquiring
any property, except for the benefit of Government,
until he shall have undergone the punishment awarded,
or the punishment to which it shall have been com-
muted, or until he shall have been pardoned.
* See section 301 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act,
No. 15 of 1979 and section 14 (3) of the Primary Courts
Procedure Act.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
Illustration
A, being convicted of waging war against the Government,
is liable to torefeiture of all his property. After sentence,
and while the same is in force, A's father dies, leaving
an estate which, but for the foreiture, would become
the property of A. The estate becomes the property of
the Government.
57. No female shall in any case be punished with No female or
person
whipping. Nor shall any person who may be sentenced sentenced to
to death or to imprisonmpnt for more than five years death or
imprisonment
be punished with whipping. for more
than five years
to be punished
with whipping.
67.*† Where anything which is an offence is made Limit of punish-
ment of offence
up of parts, any of which parts is itself an offence, the which is made
offender shall not be punished with the punishment of up of several
offences.
more than one of such his offences, unless it be so
expressly provided.
Where anything is an offence failling within two or
more separate definitions of any law in force for the
time being by which offences are defined or punished ;
or
Where several acts of which one, or more than one,
would by itself .or themselves constitute an offence,
constitute when combined a different offence;
the offender shall not be punished with a more severe
punishment than the court which tries him could
award for any one of such offences.
Illustrations
(a) A gives Z fifty strokes with a stick. Here A may
have committed the offence of voluntarily causing
hurt to Z by the whole beating, and also by each of
the blows which make up the whole beating. If A
were liable to punishment for every blow, he might
be imprisoned for fifty years, one for each blow.
But he is liable only to one punishment for the
whole beating,
(b) But if, while A is beating Z, Y interferes, and A
intentionally strikes Y; here, as the blow given to
Y is no part of the act whereby A voluntarily causes
hurt to Z, A is liable to one punishment for volun-
tarily causing hurt to Z and to another for the
blow given to Y.
*Section 58 repealed by section 3 of Ordinance No. 50 of
1939.
Sections 59 to 66 repealed by section 2 of Ordinance No 20
of 1938.
† See section 301 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act,
No. 15 of 1979 and section 14(3) of the Primary Courts
Procedure Act.
Punishment 67A. In all cases in which judgment is given that a
of a person
found guilty person is guilty of one of several offences specified in
of one of several the judgment, but that it is doubtful of which of these
offences, where
it is doubtful offences he is guilty, the offender shall be punished for
of which of the the offence for which the lowest punishment is
offences he is
guilty. provided, if the same punishment is not provided for
all.
Punishment 68. Whoever, having been convicted of an offence
of persons
convicted ,after punishable under Chapter XII or Chapter XVII of this
a previous con- Code with imprisonment of either description for
viction of an
offence punish- a term of three years or upwards, shall be guilty of
able with three any offence punishable under either of those Chapters
years' impri-
sonment. with imprisonment of either description for a term of
three years or upwards, shall be liable for every such
subsequent offence to double the amount of punishment
to which he would otherwise have been liable for the
same:
Provided that he shall not in any case be liable to
imprisonment for a term exceeding twenty years or to
a whipping which shall exceed twenty-four lashes or
twenty-four strokes.
CHAPTER IV
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS
Act done by a 69. Nothing is an offence which is done by a person
person bound, or who is, or who by reason of a mistake of fact and not
by mistake of
fact believing by reason of mistake of law in good faith believes
himself bound
himself to be, bound by law to do it.
by law to do it.
Illustrations
(a) A, a soldier, fires on a mob by the order of his
superior officer in conformity with the commands
of the law. A has committed no offence.
(b) A, an officer of a Court, being ordered by
that court to arrest Y, and, after due inquiry,
believing Z to be Y, arrests Z. A has committed no
offence.
Act of Judge 70. Nothing is an offence which is done by a Judge
when acting
when acting judicially in the exercise of any power
judicially.
which is, or which in good faith he believes to be given
to him by law.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
71. Nothing which is done in pursuance of, or which Act done
pursuant to the
is warranted by the judgement or order of a Court,
judgment or
if done whilst such judgement or order remains order of a Court.
in force, is an offence, notwithstanding the court may
have had no jurisdiction to pass such judgement or
order, provided the person doing the act in good faith
believes that the court had such jurisdiction.
72. Nothing is an offence which is done by any Act done by a
person justified
person who is justified by law, or who by reason of a
or by mistake of
mistake of fact and not by reason of a mistake of law fact believing
himself justified
in good faith believes himesif to be justified by law in by law.
doing it.
Illustration
A sees Z commit what appears to A to be a murder. A in
the exercise, to the best of his judgment exerted in
good taith, of the power which the law gives to all
persons of apprehending murderers in the act, seizes
Z, in order to bring Z before the proper authorities.
A has committed no offence, though it may turn out
that Z was acting in self defence.
73. Nothing is an offence which is done by accident Accident in the
doing of a law-
or misfortune, and without any criminal intention or
full act.
knowledge in the doing of a lawful act in a lawful
manner, by lawful means and with proper care and
caution.
Illustration
A is at work with a hatchet; the head flies off and kills
a man who is standing by. Here, if there was no want
of proper caution on the part of A, his act is excusable
and not an offence.
74. Nothing is an offence merely by reason of its
Act likely to
being done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause cause harm but
done without a
harm if it be done without any criminal intention to criminal intent,
cause harm and in good faith for the purpose of and to prevent
other harm.
preventing or avoiding other harm to person or
property.
Explanation.—It is a question of fact in such a case
whether the harm to be prevented or avoided was of
such a nature and so imminent as to justify or excuse
the risk of doing the act with the knowledge that it
was likely to cause harm.
Illustrations
(a) A, the captain of a steam vessel, suddenly and with-
out any fault or negligence on his part, finds himself
in auch a position that, before he can stop his vessel,
he must inevitably run down a boat, B, with twenty
or thirty passengers on board, unless he changes the
course of his vessel, and that, by changing his course, he
must incur risk of running down a boat, C, with only
two passengers on board, which he may possibly clear.
Here, if a alters his course without any intention to
run down the boat C, and in good faith for the purpose
of avoiding the danger to the passengers in the boat
B, he is not guilty of an offence, though he may run
down the boat C by doing an act which he knew was
likely to cause that effect, if it be found as a matter of
fact that the danger which he intended to avoid was
such as to excuse him in incurring the risk of running
down the boat C.
(b) A in a great fire pulls down houses in order to
prevent the conflagration from spreading, He does this
with the intention, in good faith, of saving human life
or property. Here if it be found that the harm to be
prevented was of such a nature and so imminent as to
excuse A's act, A is not guilty of the offence.
Act of a child 75. Nothing is an offence which is done by a child
under eight
years of age. under eight years of age.
[§ 4,50 of 1939.]
Act of a child 76. Nothing is an offence which is done by a child
above eight and
above eight years of age and under twelve, who has
under twelve
years of age who not attained sufficient maturity of understanding to
has not suffi-
cient maturity judge of the nature and consequence of his conduct on
of understan-
ding. that occasion.
(§ 4,50of 1939.)
Act of a person 77. Nothing is an offence which is done by a person
of unsound
who, at the time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness
mind.
of mind, is incapable of knowing the nature of the
act, or that he is doing what is either wrong or
contrary to law.
Act of a person 78. Nothing is an offence which is done by a
incapable of person who, at the time of doing it, is, by reason of
judgment by
reason of intoxication incapable of knowing the nature of the
intoxication
caused against act, or that he is doing what is either wrong or
his will. contrary to law:
Provided that the thing which intoxicated him was
administered to him without his knowledge or against
his will.
79. In cases where an act done is not an offence
Offence
requiring a unless done with a particular knowledge or intent, a
particular
person who does the act in a state of intoxication shall
intent or
knowledge be liable to be dealt with as if he had the same
committed by
one who is knowledge as he would have had if he had not been
intoxicated. intoxicated, unless the thing which intoxicated him was
administered to him without his knowledge or against
his will.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
80. Nothing, which is not intended to cause death Act not
intended and
or grievous hurt, and which is not known by the doer not known to be
to be likely to cause death or grievous hurt is an offence likely to cause
death or grie-
by reason of any harm which it may cause, or be vous hurt done
intended by the doer to cause to any person above by consent.
eighteen years of age, who has given consent, whether
express or implied, to suffer that harm ; or by reason
of any harm which it may be known by the doer to
be likely to cause to any such person who has consented
to take the risk of that harm.
Illustration
A and Z agree to fence with each other for amusement.
This agreement implies the consent of each to suffer any
harm which, in the course of such fencing, may be
caused without foul play; and if A, while playing
fairly hurts Z, A commits no offence.
81. Nothing, which is not intended to cause death, Act not
is an offence by reason of any harm which it may intended to
cause death
cause, or be intended by the doer to cause, or be known done by consent
in good faith for
by the doer to be likely to cause, to any person for
the benefit of a
whose benefit it is done in good faith, and who has person.
given a consent, whether express or implied, to suffer
that harm, or to take the risk, of that harm.
Illustration
A, a surgeon, knowing that a particular operation is likely
to cause the death of Z, who suffers under a painful
complaint, but not intending to cause Z's death, and
intending, in good faith, Z's benefit, performs that
operation on Z with Z's consent. A has committed no
offence.
82. Nothing, which is done in good faith for the Act done in
good faith for
benefit of a person under twelve years of age, or of the benefit of
unsound mind, by or by consent, either express or a child or person
of unsound
implied, of the guardian or other person having lawful mind, by or by
charge of that person, is an offence by reason of any consent of
guardian.
harm which it may cause, or be intended by the doer
to cause, or be known by the,doer to be likely to cause,
to that person:
Provided—
Firstly—That this exception shall not extend to the
intentional causing of death, or to the attempting to
cause death;
Secondly—That this exception shall not extend to
the doing of anything which the person doing it knows
to be likely to cause death, for any purpose other than
the preventing of death or grievous hurt or the curing
of any grievous disease or infirmity ;
Thirdly—That this exception shall not extend to the
voluntary causing of grievous hurt, or to the attempting
to cause grievous hurt, unless it be for the purpose of
preventing death or grievous hurt or the curing of any
grievous disease or infirmity ;
Fourthly—That this exception shall not extend to
the abetment of any offence, to the committing of
which offence it would not extend.
Illustration
A, in good faith, for his child's benefit, without his child's
consent has his child cut for the stone by a surgeon
knowing it to be likely that the operation will cause the
child's death, but not intending to cause the child's
death. A is within the exception, inasmuch as his
object was the cure of the child.
83. A consent is not such a consent as is intended
Consent known
to be given by any section of this Code, if the consent is given by
under fear or a person under fear of injury, or under a misconception
misconception.
of fact, and if the person doing the act knows, or has
reason to believe, that the consent was given in
consequence of such fear or misconception; or
If the consent is given by a person, who, from
Consent of a
child or person unsoundness of mind or intoxication, is unable to
of unsound understand the nature and consequence of that to
mind.
which he gives his consent; or unless the contrary
appear from the context, if the consent is given by a
person who is under twelve years of age.
84. The exceptions in sections 80, 81 and 82 do not
Acts which are
offences inde- extend to acts which are offences independently of any
pendently of
harm which they may cause, or be intended to cause,
harm caused to
the person, con- or be known to be likely to cause, to the person giving
senting are not
the consent, or on whose behalf the consent is given.
within the
exceptions in
sections 80, 81, Illustration
and 82. Causing miscarriage (unless caused in good faith for the
purpose of saving the life of the woman) is an offence
independently of any harm which it may cause or be
intended to cause to the woman. Therefore it is not
an offence " by reason of such harm ", and the consent
of the woman or of her guardian to the causing of such
miscarriage does not justify the act.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
85. Nothing is an offence by reason of any harm Act done in
good faith for
which it may cause to a person for whose benefit it the benefit of a
person without
is done in good faith even without that person's
consent.
consent, if the circumstances are such that it is
impossible for that person to signify consent, or if
that person is incapable of giving consent, and has no
guardian or other person in lawful charge of him from
whom it is possible to obtain consent in time for the
thing to be done with benefit:
Provided—
Firstly—That this exception shall not extent to the
intentional causing of death or the attempting to cause
death ;
Secondly—That this exception shall not extend to
the doing of anything which the person doing it knows
to be likely to cause death for any purpose other than
the preventing of death or grievous hurt or the curing
af any grievous disease or infirmity ;
Thirdly—That this exception shall not extend to the
voluntary causing of hurt, or to the attempting to cause
hurt, for any purpose other than the preventing of
death or hurt;
Fourthly—That this exception shall not extend to
the abetment of any offence, to the committing of
which offence it would not extend.
Illustrations
(a) Z is thrown from his horse, and is insensible, A a
surgeon, finds that Z requires to be trepanned. A, not
intending Z's death, but in good faith, for Z's benefit
performs the trepan before Z recovers his power of
judging for himself. A has committed no offence.
(b) Z is attacked by a bear. A fires at the bear knowing
it to be likely that the shot may kill Z, but not intend-
ing to kill Z, and in good faith intending Z's benefit.
A's ball gives Z a mortal wound. A has committed no
offence.
(c) A, a surgeon, sees a child suffer an accident which
is likely to prove fatal unless an operation be imme-
diately performed. There is not time to apply to the
child's guardian. A performs the operation in spite of
the entreaties of the child, intending, in good faith, the
child's benefit. A has committed no offence.
(d) A is in a house which is on fire, with Z, a child.
People below hold out a blanket. A drops the child
from the housetop, knowing it to be likely that the
fall may kill the child, but not intending to kill the
child, and intending, in good faith, the child's benefit.
Here, even it the child is killed by the fall, A has
committed no offence.
Explanation.—Mere pecuniary benefit is not benefit
within the meaning of sections 81, 82, and 85.
Communica- 86. No communication made in good faith is an
tion made in offence by reason of any harm to the person to whom
good faith.
it is made, if it is made for the benefit of that person.
Illustration
A, a surgeon, in good faith communicates to a patient
his opinion that he cannot live. The patient dies in
consequence of the shock. A has committed no offence,
though he knew it to be likely that the communication
might cause the patient's death.
Act to which a 87. Except murder and offences against the State
person is com-
punishable with death, nothing is an offence which is
pelled by
threats. done by a person who is compelled to do it by threats,
which at the time of doing it, reasonably cause the
apprehension that instant death to that person will
otherwise be the consequence ; provided the person
doing the act did not of his own accord, or from a
reasonable apprehension of harm to himself short of
instant death, place himself in the situation by which
he became subject to such constraint.
Explanation 1.—A person who, of his own accord, or by
reason of a threat of being beaten, joins a gang of
housebreakers, knowing their character, is not entitled
to the benefit of this exception, on the ground of bis
having been compelled by his associates to do any-
thing that is an offence by law.
Explanation 2.—A person seized by a gang of house-
breakers, and forced by threat of instant death to do a
thing which is an offence by law,—for example, a smith
compelled to take his tools and to force the door of a
house for the housebreakers to enter and plunder it,—
is entitled to the benefit of this exception.
88. Nothing is an offence by reason that it causes,
Act causing
slight harm. or that it is intended to cause, or that it is known to
be likely to cause, any harm, if that harm is so slight
that no person of ordinary sense and temper would
complain of such harm.
OF THE RIGHT OF PRIVATE DEFENCE
Nothing done in 89. Nothing is an offence which is done in the
private defence exercise of the right of private defence.
is an offenece.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
90. Every person has a right, subject to the restric- Right of private
defence of the
tions contained in section 92, to defend—
body and of
property.
Firstly—His own body, and the body of any other
person, against any offence affecting the human body ;
Secondly—The property, whether movable or
immovable, of himself or of any other person, against
any act which is an offence falling under the definition
of theft, robbery, mischief or criminal trespass, or
which is an attempt to commit theft, robbery, mischief
or criminal trespass.
91. When an act, which would otherwise be a certain Right of private
defence against
offence, is not that offence by reason of the youth, the
the act of a
want of maturity of understanding, the unsoundness person of un-
sound mind, &c.
of mind, or the intoxication of the person doing that
act or by reason of any misconception on the part of
that person, every person has the same right of private
defence against that act which he would have if the
act were that offence.
Illustrations
(a) Z, under the influence of madness, attempts to kill
A ; Z is guilty of no offence. But A has the same right
of private defence which he would have if Z were
sane.
(b) A enters by night a house which he is legally entitled
to enter. Z, in good faith, taking A for a housebreaker,
attacks A. Here Z, by attacking A under this miscon-
ception, commits no offence, but A has the same right
of private defence against Z which he would have it
Z were not acting under that misconception.
92. (1) There is no right of private defence against
Acts against
an act which does not reasonably cause the apprehen- which there
is no right
sion of death or of grievous hurt, if done, or attempted of private
to be done, by a public officer acting in good faith defence.
under colour of his office, though that act may not
be strictly justifiable by law.
(2) There is no right of private defence against an
act which does not reasonably cause the apprehension
of death or of grievous hurt, if done, or attempted to
be done, by the direction of a public officer acting in
good faith under colour of his office, though that
direction may not be strictly justifiable by law.
(3) There is no right of private defence in cases in
which there is time to have recourse to the protection
of the public authorities.
Extent to (4) The right of private defence in no case extends
which the right to the inflicting of more harm than it is necessary to
may be
exercised. inflict for the purpose of defence.
Explanation 1.—A person is not deprived of the right of
private defence against an act done, or attempted to be
done by a public officer, as such, unless he knows or
has reason to believe, that the person doing the act is
such public officer.
Explanatioon 2.—A person is not deprived of the right of
private defence against an act done, or attempted to be
done, by the direction of a public officer, unless he
knows, or has reason to believe, that the person doing
the act is acting by such direction ; or unless such
person states the authority under which he acts, or,
if he has authority in writing, unless he produces such
authority, if demanded.
When the right 93. The right of private defence of the body extends,
of private under the restrictions mentioned in the last preceding
defence of the
body extends section, to the voluntary causing of death or of any
to causing other harm to the assailant, if the offence which
death.
occasions the exercise of the right be of any of the
descriptions hereinafter enumerated, namely—
Firstly—Such an assault as may reasonably cause
the apprehension that death will otherwise be the
consequence of such assault;
Secondly—Such an assault as may reasonably cause
the apprehension that grievous hurt will otherwise be
the consequence of such assault;
Thirdly—An assault with the intention of com-
mitting rape;
Fourthly—An assault with the intention of gratifying
unnatural lust;
Fifthly—An assault with the intention of kidnapping
or abducting;
Sixthly—An assault with the intention of wrong-
fully confining a person, under circumstances which
may reasonably cause him to apprehend that he will
be unable to have recourse to the public authorities
for his release.
PENAL CODE [Cap.19
94. If the offence be not of any of the descriptions When such
right extends
enumerated in the last preceding section, the right of to causing any
harm other
private defence of the body does not extend to the
than death.
voluntary causing of death to the assailant, but does
extend, under the restrictions mentioned in section 92,
to the voluntary causing to the assailant of any harm
other than death.
95. The right of private defence of the body Commence-
ment and
commences as soon as a reasonable apprehension of continuance
of the right
danger to the body arises from an attempt or threat to
of private
commit the offence, though the offence may not have defence of the
body.
been committed; and it continues as long as such
apprehension of danger to the body continues.
96. The right of private defence of property extends, When the right
of private
under the restrictions mentioned in section 92, to the defence of
voluntary causing of death or of any other harm to the property
extends to
wrong-doer, if the offence, the committing of which, causing death.
or the attempting to commit which, occasions the
exercise of the right, be an offence of any of the
descriptions hereinafter enumerated, namely—
Firstly—Robbery;
Secondly—House-breaking by night;
Thirdly—Mischief by fire, or explosives committed
on any building, tent, or vessel, which building, tent,
or vessel is used as a human dwelling, or as a place
for the custody of property ;
Fourthly—Theft, mischief, or house-trespass under
such circumstances as may reasonably cause
apprehension that death or grievous hurt will be the
consequence if such right of private defence is not
exercised.
97. If the offence the committing of which, or the When such
attempting to commit which, occasions the exercise of right extends to
causing any
the right of private defence, be theft, mischief, or harm other
criminal trespass not of any of the descriptions than death.
enumerated in the last preceding section, that right
does not extent to the voluntary causing of death, but
does extend, subject to the restrictions mentioned in
section 92, to the voluntary causing to the wrong-doer
of any harm other than death.
Commence- 98. Firstly—The right of private defence of property
ment and
continuance of commences when a reasonable apprehension of danger
the right of
private defence to the property commences.
of property.
Seconldy—The right of private defence of property
against theft continues till the offender has effected his
retreat with the property or the assistance of the public
authorities is obtained, or the property has been
recovered.
Thirdly—The right of private defence of property
against robbery continues as long as the offender
causes or attempts to cause to any person death or
hurt or wrongful restraint; or as long as the fear of
instant death or of instant hurt or of instant personal
restraint continues.
Fourthly—The right of private defence of property
against criminal trespass or mischief continues as long
as the offender continues in the commission of criminal
trespass or mischief.
Fifthly—The right of private defence of property
against house-breaking by night continues as long as
the house-trespass which has begun by such house-
breaking continues.
Right of private 99. If in the exercise of the right of private defence
defence against
against an assault which reasonably causes the appre-
deadly assault
when there is hension of death, the defender be so situated that he
risk of harm to
cannot effectually exercise that right without risk of
an innocent
person. harm to an innocent person, his right of private
defence extends to the running of that risk.
Illustration
A is attacked by a mob who attempt to murder him. He
cannot effectually exercise his right of private defence
without firing on the mob, and he cannot fire without
risk of harming young children who are mingled with
the mob. A commits no offence, if by so firing, he
harms any of the children.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
CHAPTER V
OF ABETMENT
100. A person abets the doing of a thing who- Abetment of
the doing of
a thing.
Firstly— Instigates any person to do that thing; or
Secondly—Engages in any conspiracy for the doing
of that thing; or
Thirdly—Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal
omission, the doing of that thing.
Explanation 1.—A person who, by wilful misrepresenta-
tion or by wilful concealment of a material fact
which he is bound to disclose, voluntarily causes or
procures, or attempts to cause or procure, a thing to
be done, is said to instigate the doing of that thing.
Illustration
A, a public officer, is authorized by a warrant from a
Court to tapprehend Z. B, knowing that
fact and also that C is not Z, wilfully represents to
A that C is Z, and thereby intentionally causes A
to apprehend C. Here B abets by instigation the
apprehension of C.
Explanation 2.—A conspiracy for the doing of a thing is
when two or more persons agree to do that thing
or cause or procure that thing to be done. A person
within the jurisdiction of the court abets an offence
by engaging with one or more other persons
beyond the jurisdiction of the court in a conspiracy
for the commission of an offence by them, or either
of them, or by any other person.
Explanation 3.—Whoever, either prior to or at the time
of the commission of an act, does anything in order
to facilitate the commission of that act, and
thereby facilitates the commission thereof, is said
to aid the doing of that act.
101. A person abets an offence who abets either the
Abettor.
commission of an offence or the commission of an act
which would be an offence if committed by a person
capable by law of committing an offence with the
same intention or knowledge as that of the abettor.
Explanation1.—The abetment of the illegal omission of
an act may amount to an offence although the
abettor may not himself be bound to do that act.
Explanation 2.—To constitute the offence of abetment, it
is not necessary that the act abetted should be
committed, or that the effect requisite to constitute
the offence should be caused,
Ilustrations
(a) A instigates B to murder C. B refuses to do so. A
is guilty of abetting B to commit murder.
(b) A instigates B to murder D. B, in pursuance of the
instigation, stabs D. D recovers from the wound. A
is guilty of instigating B to commit murder.
Explanation 3.—It is not necessary that the person
abetted should be capable by law of committing an
offence, or that he should have the same guilty
intention or knowledge as that of the abettor, or
any guilty intention or knowledge.
Illustrations
(a) A, with a guilty intention, abets a child or a person
of unsound mind to commit an act which would be
an offence if committed by a person capable by
law of committing an offence, and having the same
intention as A. Here A, whether the act be commit-
ted or not, is guilty of abetting an offence.
(b) A, with the intention of murdering Z, instigates B, a
child under eight years of age, to do an act which
causes Z's death. B, in consequence of the abetment
does the act, and thereby causes Z's death. Here,
though B was not capable by law of committing an
offence A is liable to be punished in the same
manner as if B had been capable by law of com-
mitting an offence and had committed murder and
he is therefore subject to the punishment of death.
(c) A instigates B to set fire to a dwelling house. B, in
consequence of the unsoundness of his mind, being
incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that
he is doing what is wrong or contrary to law, sets
fire to the house in consequence of A's instigation.
B has committed no offence, but A is guilty of
abetting the offence of setting fire to a dwelling
house, and is liable to the punishment provided
for that offence.
(d) A, intending to cause a theft to be committed, insti-
gates B to take property belonging to Z out of Z's
possession. A induces B to believe that the property
belongs to A. B takes the property out of Z's posses-
sion, in good faith believing it to be A's property.
B, acting under this misconception, does not take
dishonestly, and therefore does not commit theft.
But A is guilty of abetting theft, and is liable to the
same punishment as if B had committed theft.
Explnation 4.—The abetment of an offence baing an
offence, the abetment of such an abetment is also
an offence.
Illustration
A instigates B to instigate C to murder Z. B accordingly
instigates C to murder Z and C commits that offence
in consequence of B's instigation. B is liable to be
punished for his offence with the punishment for
murder; and as A instigated B to commit the
offence A is also liable to the same punishment.
Explanation 5.—It is not necessary to the commission of
the offence of abetment, by conspiracy that the
abettor should concert the offence with the person
who commits it. It is sufficient if he engaged in the
conspiracy in pursuance of which the offence is
committed.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
Illustration
A concerts with B a plan for poisoning Z. It is agreed
that A shall administer the poison. B then explains
the plan to C, mentioning that a third person is to
administer the poison, but without mentioning A's
name. C agrees to procure the poison, and procures and
delivers it to B for the purpose of its being used in
the manner explained. A administers the poison ; Z
dies in consequence. Here, though A and C have not
conspired together, yet C has been engaged in the cons-
piracy in pursuance of which Z has been murdered.
C has therefore committed the offence defined in this
section, and is liable to the punishment for murder.
I01A. A person abets an offence within the Abetment in
Sri Lanka of
meaning of this Code who in Sri Lanka abets the offences
commission of any act without and beyond Sri Lanka outtside it.
which would constitute an offence if committed in
Sri Lanka.
102. Whoever abets any offence shall, if the act Punishment of
abetment if the
abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment, act abetted is
and no express provision is made by this Code for the committed in
consequence,
punishment of such abetment, be punished with the and where no
express provi-
punishment provided for the offence.
sion is made for
Explanation.—An act or offence is said to be committed its punishment.
in consequence of abetment, when it is committed in
consequence of the instigation, or in pursuance of the
conspiracy, or with the aid which constitutes the
abetment.
Illustrations
(a) A offer a bribe to B, a public officer, as a reward
for showing A some favour in the exercise of B's
official functions. B accepts the bribe. A has abetted
the offence defined in section 158.
(b) A instigates B to give false evidence. B, in conse-
quence of the instigation commits that offence. A is
guilty of abetting that offence, and is liable to the
same punishment as B.
(c) A and B conspire to poison Z. A, in pursuance of the
conspiracy, procures the poison and delivers it to
B, in order that he may administer it to Z. B, in
pursuance of the conspiracy, administers the poison
to Z in A's absence and thereby causes Z's death.
Here B is guilty of murder. A is guilty of abetting
that offence by conspiracy, and is liable to the
punishment for murder:
103. Whoever abets the commission of an offence Punishment
of abetment, if
shall, if the person abetted does the act with a
the person
different intention or knowledge from that of the abetted does
the act with a
abettor, be punished with the punishment provided different inten-
for the offence which would have been committed if tion from that
of the abettor.
the act had been done with the intention or knowledge
of the abettor and with no other.
Liability of 104. When an act is abetted and a different act is
abettor when
one act is done, the abettor is liable for the act done, in the
abetted
same manner and to the same extent as if be had
and a different
act is done. directly abetted it:
Provided the act done was a probable consequence
of the abetment, and was committed under the
influence of the instigation, or with the aid or in
pursuance of the conspiracy which constituted the
abetment.
Illustrations
(a) A instigates a child to put poison into the food of
Z, and gives him poison for that purpose. The
child, in consequence of the instigation by mistake
puts the poison into the food of Y, which is by the
side of that of Z. Here, if the child was acting
under the influence of A's instigation, and the act
done was under circumstances a probable
consequence of the abetment, A is liable in the
same manner, and to the same extent, as if he had
instigated the child to put the poison into the food
of Y.
(b) A instigates B to burn Z's house. B sets fire to the
house and at the same time commits theft of pro-
perty there. A though guilty of abetting the
burning of the house, is not guilty of abetting the
theft; for the theft was a distinct act, and not a
probable consequence of the burning.
(c) A instigates B and C to break into an inhabited
house at midnight for the purpose of robbery, and
provides them with arms for that purpose. B and
C break into the house, and being resisted by Z,
one of the inmates, murder Z. Here, if the murder
was the probable consequence of the abetment,
A is liable to the punishment provided for murder.
Abettor when 105. If the act for which the abettor is liable under
liable to cumu-
lative punish- the last preceding section is committed in addition to
ment for act the act abetted, and constitutes a distinct offence, the
abetted and for
act done. abettor is liable to punishment for each of the
offences.
Illustration
A instigates B to resist by force a distress made by a
public officer. B, in consequence, resists that distress.
In offering the resistance, B voluntarily causes grievous
hurt to the officer executing the distress. As B has
committed both the offence of resisting the distress
and the offence of voluntarily causing grievous hurt,
B is liable to punishment for both these offences ; and
if A knew that B was likely voluntarily to cause griev-
ous hurt in resisting the distress. A will also be liable
to punishment for each of the offences.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
106. When an act is abetted with the intention on Liability of
abettor for an
the part of the abettor of causing a particular effect, effect caused by
and an act for which the abettor is liable in consequence the act abetted
different from
of the abetment causes a different effect from that that intended
by the abettor.
intended by the abettor, the abettor is liable for the
effect caused, in the same manner and to the same
extent as if he had abetted the act with the intention
of causing that effect, provided he knew that the act
abetted was likely to cause that effect.
Illustration
A instigates B to cause grievous hurt to Z. B, in conse-
quence of the instigation, causes grievous hurt to Z.
Z dies in consequence. Here, if A knew that the griev-
ous hurt abetted was likely to cause death, A is liable
to be punished with the punishment provided for
murder.
107. Whenever any person who, if absent, would be Abettor present
when offence is
liable to be punished as an abettor, is present when the committed.
act or offence for which he would be punishable in
consequence of the abetment is committed, he shall
be deemed to have committed such act or offence.
Illustration
A writes to B telling him that C is likely to pass along
a certain road with treasure, and instigates B to lie in
wait for and rob C. B on such instigation lies in wait
for and robs C, A accompanying C along the journey.
A is guilty under this section.
108. Whoever abets the commission of an offence Abetment of an
offence puniah-
punishable with death shall, if that offence be not
able with death,
committed in consequence of the abetment, and no if the offence be
not committed
express provision is made by this Code for the punish- in consequence
ment of such abetment, be punished with imprisonment of the
abetment.
of either description for a term which may extent to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine;
and if any act for which the abettor is liable in con- If an act which
cause harm be
sequence of the abetment, and which causes hurt to
done in conse-
any person, is done, the abettor shall be liable to quence of the
abetment.
imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to fourteen years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
Illstration
A instigates B to murder Z. The offence is not committed.
If B had murdered Z he would have been subject to
the punishment of death. Therefore A is liable to
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven
years and also to a fine ; and if any hurt be done to
Z in consequence of the abetment, he will be liable
to imprisonment for a term which may extent to
fourteen years, and to fine.
Abetment of an 109. Whoever abets an offence punishable with
offence punish-
able with impri- imprisonment shall, if that offence be not committed in
sonment if the
consequence of the abetment, and no express provision
offence be not
committed in is made by this Code for the punishment of such abet-
consequence of
ment, be punished with imprisonment of any
the abetment.
description provided for that offence for a term which
may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term
provided for that offence or with such fine as is
provided for that offence, or with both ;
and if the abettor or the person abetted is a public
If the abettor
or the person officer, whose duty it is to prevent the commission of
abetted be a
public officer such offence, the abettor shall be punished with impri-
whose sonment of any description provided for that offence,
duty it is to
prevent the for a term which may extend to one-half of the longest
offence. term provided for that offence, or with such fine as is
provided for the offence, or with both.
Illuitrations
(a) A offers of bribe to B, a public officer as a reward
for showing A some favour in the exercise of B's
official functions. B refuses to accept the bribe. A is
punishable under this section.
(b) A instigate B to give false evidence. Here, if B does
not give false evidence. A has nevertheless com-
mitted the offence defined in this section, and in
punishable accordingly.
(c) A, a police officer, whose duty it is to prevent
robbery, abets, the commission of robbery. Here,
though the robbery be not committed. A if liable
to one-halt of the longest term of imprisonment
provided for that offence, and also to fine.
(d) B abets the commission of a robbery by A, a police
officer, whose duty it is prevent that offence. Here
though the robbery be not committed, B is liable to
one-half of the longest term of imprisonment
provided for the offence of robbery and also to
fine.
Abetting the 110. Whoever abets the commission of an offence
commission
of an offence by by the public generally, or by any number or class of
the public, or by
persons exceeding ten, shall be punished with imprison-
more than ten
persons. ment of either description for a term which may extend
to three years, or with fine, or both.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
Illustration
A fixes in a public place a placard, instigating a sect
consisting of more than ten members to meet at a
certain time and place for the purpose of attacking
the members of an adverse sect while engaged in a
procession. A has committed the offence defined in this
section.
111. Whoever, intending to facilitate or knowing it Concealing a
design to
to be likely that he will thereby facilitate the commis- commit an
offence punish-
sion of an offence punishable with death or imprison-
able with death
ment for twenty years voluntarily conceals, by any act or imprison-
ment for twenty
or illegal ommission, the existence of a design to years.
commit such offence, or makes any representation
which he knows to be false respecting such design, If the offence be
shall, if that offence be committed, be punished with committed
imprisonment of either description for a term which
If the offence be
may extend to seven years, or if the offence be not
not committed.
committed, with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years; and in
either case shall also be liable to fine.
Illustration
A, knowing that murder is about to be committed at B,
falsely informs the Magistrate that a murder is about
to be committed at C, a place in an opposite direction,
and thereby misleads the Magistrate with intent to
facilitate the commission of the offence. The murder
is committed at B in pursuance of the design. A is
punishable under this section.
112. Whoever, being a public officer, intending to A public
officer con-
facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cealing a design
facilitate the commission of an offence, the commission to commit an
offence which it
of which it is his duty as such public officer to pre- is his duty to
prevent.
vent, voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal ommis-
sion, the existence of a design to commit such offence,
or makes any representation which he knows to be
false respecting such design, shall if the offence be If the offence be
committed.
committed, be punished with imprisonment of any
description provided for the offence, for a term which
may extend to one-half of the longest term of such
imprisonment, or with such fine as is provided for that
offence, or with both ; or, it the offence be punishable If the offence be
with death, with imprisonment of either description punishable with
death.
for a term which may extend to ten years; or, if the
offence be not committed, shall be punished with im- If the offence
be not
prisonment of any description provided for the offence committed.
for a term which may extend to one-fourth part of the
longest term of such imprisonment, or with such fine
as is provided for the offence, or with both.
Illustration
A,an officer of police, being legally bound to give infor-
mation of all designs to commit murder which may
come to his knowledge, and knowing that B designs
to commit murder, omits to give such information, with
intent to facilitate the commission of that offence.
Here A has by an illegal omission concealed the
existence of B's design, and is liable to punishment
according to the provision of this section.
Concealing a. 113. Whoever, intending to facilitate or knowing it
design to
commit an to be likely that he will thereby facilitate the com-
offence punish- mission of an offence punishable with imprisonment
able with
i rnprisonment. voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal ommission,
the existence of a design to commit such offence, or
makes any representation which he knows to be false
If the offence be respecting such design, shall, if the offence be
committed.
committed, be punished with imprisonment of the
description provided for the offence, for a term which
may extend to one-fourth, and, if the offence be not
If not commit- committed, to one-eighth of the longest term of such
ted. imprisonment, or with such fine as is provided for the
offence, or with both.
CHAPTER VA
OF CONSPIRACY
Definition of 113A. (l) If two or more persons agree to commit
conspiracy.
or abet or act together with a common purpose for or
in committing or abetting an offence, whether with or
without any previous concert or deliberation, each of
them is guilty of the offence of conspiracy to commit
or abet that offence, as the case may be.
(2) A person within Sri Lanka can be guilty of cons-
piracy by agreeing with another person who is beyond
Sri Lanka for the commission or abetment of any offence
to be committed by them or either of them, or by any
other person, either within or beyond Sri Lanka, and for
the purposes of this subsection as to an offence to be
committed beyond Sri Lanka ," offence " means any act
which if done within Sri Lanka would be an offence under
this Code or under any other law.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
Explanation- This section shall not exceed to the case in
which the conspiracy is between a husband and his
wife.
113B. If two or more persons are guilty of the Punishment
for conspiracy.
offence of conspiracy for the commission or abetment
of any offence, each of them shall be punished in the
same manner as if he had abetted such offence.
CHAPTER VI
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE
114 . Whoever wages war against the State, or Waging or
attempting to
attempts to wage such war,or abets the waging of wage war, or
such war, shall be punished with death, or abetting the
waging of war
imprisonment of either description which may be
against the
extended to twenty years, and shall forfeit all his
property.
Illustration
A joins an insurrection against the State A has com-
mitted the offence defined in this section.
115. Whoever conspires to commit any of the offences Conspiracy to
commit offence
punishable by the next preceding section, or conspires to punishable by
overawe, by means of criminal force or the show of criminal
section.
force, the State, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description which may extend to twenty years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
Explanation— To constitute a conspiracy under this
section it is not necessary that any act or illegal
omission shall take place in pursuance thereof.
116. Whoever collects men, arms, or ammunition, Collecting arms
&c. with the
or otherwise prepares to wage war with the intention intetion of
of either wagine or being prepared to wage war waging war
against the State.
against the State, shall be punished with imprison-
ment of either description for a term not exceeding
twenty years, and shall forfeit all his property.
117. Whoever by any act, or by any illegal Concealing with
intent to faci-
omission, conceals the existence of a design to wage litate a design to
war against the State intending by such concealment wage war.
to facilitate, or knowing it to be likely that such
concealment will facilitate, the waging of such war,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extent to ten years,
and shall also, be liable to fine.
Attempt by 118. Whoever, by means of any contumacious, insulting or
contumacious
or insulting disparaging words, whether spoken or intended to be read, or
words or signs
by signs or visible representations, shall attempt to bring the
to bring the
State in to State into contempt, shall be punishable with simple imprison-
contempt.
ment for a period which may extend to two years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
Assaulting
119. Whoever, with the intention of inducing or compelling
President &c.,
with intent the President, or a Member of Parliament, to exercise or refrain
to compel
or restrain the from exercising in any manner any of the lawful powers of
exercise of any such President, or Member of Parliament, assaults or wrongfully
lawful power.
restrains, or attempts wrongfully to restrain, or overawes, by
means of criminal force or the show of criminal force, or
attempts so to overawe such President, or Member of Parliament,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
Exciting or
120. Whoever by words, either spoken or intended to be
attempting to
excite read, or by signs, or by visible representations, or otherwise,
disaffection.
excites or attempts to excite feelings of disaffection to the State,
or excites or attempts to excite hatred to or contempt of the
administration of justice, or excites or attempts to excite the
People of Sri Lanka to procure, otherwise than by lawful means,
the alteration of any matter by law established, or attempts to
raise discontent or disaffection amongst the People of Sri Lanka,
or to promote feelings of ill-will and hostility between different
classes of such People, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years.
Explanation-It is not an offence under this section by intending to
show that the State have been misled or mistaken in measures,
or to point out errors or defects in the Government or any part
of it, or in the administration of justice,
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
with a view to the reformation of such alleged error
or defects, or to excite the People of Sri Lanka to attempt
to procure by lawful means, the alteration of any
matter by law established, or to' point out in order to
their removal matters which are producing or .have
tendency to produce feelings of hatred or ill-will
between different classes of the People of Sri Lanka.
121*. Whoever wages war against the Government of Waging war
against any
any power in alliance, or at peace with the Queen, or power in
attempts to, wage such war, or abets the waging of alliance or at
peace with
such war, shall be punished with imprisonment of the Queen.
either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, to which fine may be added, or with fine.
122*. Whoever commits depredation, or makes Committing
depredation
preparations to commit depredation, on the territories on the terri-
of any power in alliance or at peace with the Queen, tories of any
power in
shall be punished with imprisonment of either alliance or at
description for a term which may extend to seven peace with
the Queen.
years, and shall also be liable to fine and to forfeiture
of any property used, or intended to be used, in
committing such depredation, or acquired by such
depredation.
123*. Whoever receives any property knowing the Receiving
property
same to have been taken in the commission of any of
taken by
the offences mentioned in sections 121 and 122 shall be war or
depredation
punished with imprisonment of either description for mentioned in
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also sections 121
and 122
be liable to fine and to forfeiture of the property so
received.
124. Whoever being a public officer, and having Public
officer
the custody of any State prisoner or prisoner of war,
voluntarily
voluntarily allow such prisoner to escape from any allowing
prisoner of
place in which such prisoner is confined, shall be State or war
punished with imprisonment of either description for in his custody
to escape.
a term which may extend to twenty years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
125. Whoever, being a public officer and having Public
officer
the custody of any State prisoner or prisoner of war, negligently
negligently suffers such prisoner to escape from any sufferring
prisoner of
place of confinement in which such prisoner is confined, State or
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a war in his
custody to
term whicli may extend to three years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
*Redundant after the 1972 Constitution
Aiding escape 126. Whoever knowingly aids or assists any State
of, rescuing,
or harbouring prisoner or prisoner of war in escaping from lawful
such prisoner. custody, or rescues or attempts to rescue any such
prisoner, or harbours or conceals any such prisoner
who has escaped from lawful custody, or offers or
attempts to offer any resistance to the re-capture of
such prisoner, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to
twenty years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation- A State prisoner or prisoner of war, who is permitted
to be at large on his parole within certain limits in Sri Lanka, is
said to escape from lawful custody if he goes beyond the limits
within which he is allowed to be at large.
Authority of 127. No prosecution shall be instituted under this
Attorney-
General Chapter except by, or with the written authority of,
required for
the Attorney-General.
prosocution
under this
Chapter.
CHAPTER VII
OF OFFENCES RELATING To THE NAVY, ARMY,
AND Air FORCE
Abetting 128. Whoever abets the committing of mutiny by an officer,
mutiny or
attempting to sailor, soldier, or airman in the Sri Lanka navy, Sri Lanka army,
seduce a
sailor, soldier, or Sri Lanka air force or attempts to seduce any such officer,
or airman, sailor, soldier, or airman from his allegiance or his duty, shall
from his
duty. be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to twenty years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
Abetment of
mutiny, if 129. Whoever abets the committing of mutiny by an officer,
mutiny is sailor, soldier, or airman in the Sri Lanka navy, Sri Lanka army,
oommitted
in consequence or Sri Lanka air force shall, if mutiny be committed in
thereof. consequence of that abetment, be punished with death or
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to twenty years, and shall also be liable to fine.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
130. Whoever abets an assault by an officer, sailor, soldier, Abetment of
an assault by
or airman in the Sri Lanka navy, Sri Lanka army or Sri Lanka a sailor
air force, on any superior officer being in the execution of his soldier.or
airman on
office, shall be punished with imprisonment of either descrip- his superior
tion for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also officer, when
in the execution
be liable to fine. of his office.
131. Whoever abets an assault by an officer, sailor, soldier, Abetment of
or airman in the Sri Lanka navy, Sri Lanka army or Sri Lanka such assault,
if the assault
air force, on any superior officer being in the execution of his is committed.
office, shall, if such assault be committed in consequence of
that abetment, be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
132. Whoever abets the desertion of any officer, sailor, Abetment of
the desertion
soldier, or airman in the Sri Lanka navy, Sri Lanka army or Sri of a sailor,
Lanka air force shall be punished with imprisonment of either soldier or
airman.
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.
133. Whoever, except as hereinafter excepted, knowing or
Harbouring a
having reason to believe that an officer, sailor, soldier, or airman deserter.
in the Sri Lanka navy, Sri Lanka army or Sri Lanka air force has
deserted, harbours such officer, sailor, soldier, or airman shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Exception.-This provision does not extend to the case in which the
harbour is given by a wife to her husband.
134. The master or person in charge of a merchant vessel Deserter
concealed on
on board of which any deserter from the Sri Lanka navy, Sri board merchant
vessal through
Lanka army or Sri Lanka air force is concealed, shall, though
negligence of
ignorant of such concealment, be liable to a penalty not master.
exceeding five hundred rupees, if he might have known of such
concealment but for some neglect of his duty as such master or
person in charge, or but for some want of discipline on board of
the vessel.
Abetment of act of 135. Whoever abets what he knows to be an act of
insubordination by a insubordination by an officer, sailor, soldier, or airman in the
sailor, soldier, or Sri Lanka navy, Sri Lanka army or Sri Lanka air force shall, if
airman.
such act of insubordination be committed in consequence of
that abetment, be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with
fine, or with both.
Persons subject to 136. No person subject to the provisions of the Navy Act,
Navy Act, Army Act the Army Act, or the Air Force Act, or any similar law for the
or Air Force Act not time being in force, or to any regulations made thereunder, is
punishable for
subject to punishment under this Code for any of the offences
offences in this
defined in this Chapter.
Chapter.
Wearing the dress of a 137. Whoever, not being a sailor, soldier, or airman in the
sailor, soldier, or Sri Lanka navy, Sri Lanka army or Sri Lanka air force wears
airman. any grab, or carries any token resembling any grab or token
used by such a sailor, soldier, or airman, with the intention that
it may be believed that he is such a sailor, soldier, or airman,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three months, or with fine which
may extend to one hundred rupees, or with both.
CHAPTER VIII
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC TRANQUILLITY
Unlawful 138. An assembly of five or more persons is designated an
assembly. "unlawful assembly" if the common object of the persons
composing that assembly-
Firstly-To overawe by criminal force, or show of criminal
force, the State or Parliament or any public officer in the exercise
of the lawful power of such public officer; or
Secondly-To resist the execution of any law or of any legal
process; or
Thirdly-To commit any mischief or criminal trespass or other
offence; or
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
Fourthly—By means of criminal force, or show of
criminal force, to any person, to take or obtain posses-
sion of any property, or to deprive any person or the
public of the enjoyment of a right of way or of the
use of water or other incorporeal right of which such
person or public is in possession or enjoyment, or to
enforce any right or supposed right; or
Fifthly—By means of criminal force, or show of
criminal force, to compel any person to do what he
is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do what he
is legally entitled to do ; or
Sixthly—That the persons assembled, or any of
them, may train or drill themselves, or be trained or
drilled to the use of arms, or practising military move-
ments or evolutions, without the consent of the
President.
Explanation—An assembly which was not unlawful when
it assembled may subsequently become an unlawful assembly.
139. Whoever, being aware of facts which render Being a
any assembly an unlawful assembly, intentionally joins member of
an unlawful
that assembly, or continues in it, is said to be a assembly.
member of an unlawful assembly.
140. Whoever is a member of an unlawful assembly Punishment.
shall be punished with imprisonment of either descrip-
tion for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine, or with both.
141. Whoever, being armed with any deadly Joining an
unlawful
weapon, or with anything which, used as a weapon of
assembly
offence, is likely to cause death, is a member of an armed with
any deadly
unlawful assembly, shall be punished with imprison-. weapon.
ment of either description for a term which may
.extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
142. Whoever joins or continues in an unlawful Joining or
assembly knowing that such unlawful assembly has in an
been commanded by lawful authority to disperse, shall unlawful
assembly
be punished with imprisonment of either description knowing that
it has been
for a term which may extend to two years, or with
commanded
fine, or with both. to disperse.
Force used 143. Whenever force or violence is used by an
by one
unlawful assembly, or by any member thereof, in
member
prosecution prosecution of the common object of such assembly,
of common
object. every member of such assembly is guilty of the offence
of rioting.
Punishment 144. Whoever is guilty of rioting shall be punished
for rioting. with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both.
145. Whoever is guilty of rioting, being armed with
Rioting, a deadly weapon, or with anything which, used as a
armed with a
deadly weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, shall be
weapon. punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to three years, or with fine,
or with both.
Every 146. If an offence is committed by any member of
member of
unlawful an unlawful assembly in prosecution of the common
assembly to
be deemed object of that assembly, or such as the members of that
guilty of any assembly knew to be likely to be committed in prosecu-
offence
committed in tion of that object, every person who, at the time of
prosecution
of common the committing of that offence, is a member of the
object.
same assembly is guilty of that offence.
147. Whoever hires, or engages, or employs, or
Hiring or
promotes or connives at the hiring, engagement, or
conniving at
hiring of employment of any person to join or become a member
persons to
join an of any unlawful assembly, shall be punishable as a
unlawful
asseembly. member of such unlawful assembly, and for any offence
which may be committed by any such person as a
member of such unlawful assembly, in pursuance of
such hiring, engagement, or employment, in the same
manner as if he had been a member of such unlaw-
ful assembly, or himself had committed such offence.
148. Whoever knowingly joins or continues in
Knowingly
joining or any assembly or five or more persons likely to cause
continuing in a disturbance of the public peace, after such assembly
any assembly
of five or more has been lawfully commanded to disperse, shall be
persons after punished with imprisonment of either description for
it has been
commanded to a term which may extend to six months, or with flne,
disperse.
or with both.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
Explanation.—If the assembly is an unlawful assembly
within the meaning of section 188, the offender will
be punishable under section 142.
149. Whoever assaults or threatens to assault, or Assaulting or
obstructs or attempts to obstruct, any public officer obstructing
public officer
in the discharge of his duty as such public officer in when
endeavouring to disperse an unlawful asembly, or to suppressing
riot,&c.
suppress a riot or affray, or uses, or threatens, or
attempts to use crimnial force to such public officer,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine, or with both.
150. Whoever maliciously or wantonly, by doing
Wantonly
anything which is illegal, gives provocation to any giving
provocation
person intending or konwing it to be likely that such with intent
provocation will cause the offence of rioting to be to cause riot,
committed, shall, if the offence of rioting be committed
If rioting be
in consequence of such provocation, be punished with committed.
imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both ; If not
and if the offence of rioting be not committed, with committed,
imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
151. Whenever any unlawful assembly or riot Owner or
takes place, the owner or occupier of the land upon occupier of
land on which
which such unlawful assembly is held or such riot an unlawful
is committed, and any person having or claiming an assembly is
held.
interest in such land, shall be punishable with fine
not exceeding one thousand rupees, if he, knowing
that such offence is being or has been committed, or
having reason to believe it is likely to be committed,
do not give the earliest notice thereof in his power to
the nearest police officer, and do not, in the case of
his having reason to believe that it was about to be
committed, use all lawful means in his power to
prevent it, and in the event of its taking place do not
use all lawful means in his power to disperse or
suppress the riot or unlawful assembly.
152. Whenever a riot is committed for the benefit Liability of
person for
or on behalf of any person who is the owner or whole benefit
occupier of any land respecting which such riot takes a riot is
committed.
place, or who claims any interest in such land, or in
the subject of any dispute which gave rise to the riot,
or who has accepted or derived any benefit therefrom,
such person shall be punishable with fine, if he, having
reason to believe that such riot was likely to be
committed, or that the unlawful assembly by which
such riot was committed was likely to be held, shall
not use all lawful means in his power to prevent such
assembly or riot from taking place and for suppressing
and dispersing the same.
Liability of 153. Whenever a riot is committed for the benefit
agent of
owner or or on behalf of any person who is the owner or
occupier for
occupier of any land respecting which such riot takes
whose banefit
a riot is place, or who claims any interest in such land, or in
committed.
the subject of any dispute which gave rise to the riot,
or who has accepted or derived any benefit therefrom,
the agent or manager of such person shall be punish-
able with fine, if such agent or manager, having reason
to believe that such riot was likely to be committed,
or that the unlawful assembly by which such riot was
committed was likely to be held, shall not use all law-
full means in his power to prevent such riot, or
assembly from taking place and for suppressing and
dispersing the same.
Harbouring 154. Whoever harbours, receives, or assembles in
persons hired any house or premises in his occupation or charge or
for an
unlawful under his control, any persons, knowing that such
assembly. persons have been hired, engaged, or employed, or are
about to be hired, engaged, or employed, to join or
become members of an unlawful assembly, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to six months, or with fine,
or with both.
Being hired 155. Whoever is engaged or hired, or offers or
to take part
attempts to be hired or engaged, to do or assist in
in an unlawful
assembly or doing any of the acts specified in section 138, shall be
riot.
punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to six months, or with fine,
Or to go armed. or with both ; and whoever, being so engaged or hired
as aforesaid, goes armed or engages or officers to go
armed with any deadly weapons or with anything
which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
death, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years,
or with fine, or with both.
156. When two or more persons, by fighting in a "Affray".
public place disturb the public peace, they are said
to " commit an affray ".
157. Whoever commits an affray shall be punished Punishment
with imprisonment of either description for a term for committing
which may extend to one month, or with fine which affray.
may extend to one hundred rupees, or with both.
CHAPTER IX
OF OFFENCES BY OR RELATING To PUBLIC
OFFICERS
158. Whoever, being or expecting to be a public Public
officer, accepts or obtains or agrees to accept or officer taking
a gratification
attempts to obtain from any person, for himself or other than
legal remune-
for any other person, any gratification whatever, other
ration in
than legal remuneration, as a motive or reward for respect of an
doing or forbearing to do any official act, or for show- official act.
ing or forbearing to show, in the exercise of his official
functions, favour or disfavour to any person, or for
rendering or attempting to render any service or dis-
service to any person with the Government of SriLanka,
or with any public officer as such, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both.
Explanations.—" Expecting to be a public officer":
If a person not expecting to be in office, obtains a
gratification by deceiving others into a belief that he
is about to be in office, and that he will then serve
them, he may. be guilty of cheating but he is not
guilty of the offence defined in this section.
" Gratification" : The word " gratification" is not
restricted to pecuniary gratifications or to gratifications
estimable in money.
Legal remuneration" : The words " legal remunera-
tion " are not restricted to remuneration which a
public officer can lawfully demand, but Include all
remuneration which he is permitted by the Govern-
ment which he serves to accept.
" A motive or reward for doing": A person who
receives a gratification as a motive for doing what he
does not intend to do or as a reward for doing what
he has not done comes within these words.
Illustrations
(a) A, expecting to be called as a juryman, obtains from
Z, a banker, a situation in Z's bank for A's brother,
as a reward to A for giving a verdict in favour of Z.
A has committed the offence defined in this section.
(b) A, a public officer, induces Z erroneously to believe
that A's influence with the Government has obtained
a title for Z, and thus induces Z to give A money as
a reward for this service. A has committed the
offence defined in this section.
Taking a gratification 159. Whoever accepts or obtains, or agrees to accept or
in order by corrupt or attempts to obtain, from any person, for himself or for any other
illegal means, to person, any gratification whatever as a motive or reward for
influence a public inducing, by corrupt or illegal means, any public officer to do
officer.
or to forbear to do any official act, or in the exercise of the
official functions of such public officer to show favour or
disfavour to any person, or to render or attempt to render any
service or disservice to any person with Parliament or with any
public officer, as such, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years,
or with fine, or with both.
Taking a gratification 160. Whoever accepts or obtains, or agrees to accept or
for the exercise of attempts to obtain, from any person, for himself or for any other
personal influence person, any gratification whatever, as a motive or reward for
with a public officer .
inducing, by the exercise of personal influence, any public
officer to do or to forbear to do any official act, or in the exercise
of the official functions of such public officer to show favour
or disfavour to any person, or to render or attempt to render any
service or disservice to any person with Parliament, or with
any public officer, as such, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with
fine, or with both.
PENAL CODE [Cap 19
Illustration
An attorney-at-law who receives a fee for arguing a case before
a judge; a person who receives pay for arranging and
correcting a memorial addressed to Government, setting
forth the services and claims of the memorialist; a
paid agent for a condemned criminal, who lays before
the Government statements tending to show that the
condemnation was unjust—are not within this section
inasmuch as they do not exercise or profess to exercise
personal influence.
161. Whoever, being a public officer, in respect of Punishment
for abetment
whom either of the offences defined in the last two pre-
by public
ceding sections is committed, abets the offence, shall officer of the
offences
be punished with imprisonment of either description above defined.
for a term which may extend to three years, or with
fine, or with both.
Illustration
A is a public officer. B, A's wife, receives a present as
a motive for soliciting A to give an office to a particu-
lar person. A abets her doing so. B is punishable with
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, or
with fine, or with 'both. A is punishable with imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to three years or
with fine, or with both.
162. Whoever, being a public officer, knowingly Public
disobeys any direction of the law as to the way in officer dis-
obeying a
which he is conduct himself as such public officer, direction of
intending to cause or knowing it to be likely that he the law with
intent to cause
will, by such disobedience, cause injury to any person injury to any
person or the
or to the Government, shall be punished with simple
Government.
imprisonment or a term which may extend to one
year, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration
A, being an officer directed by law to take property in
execution in order to satisfy a decree pronounced in
Z's favour by a Cour knowingly disobeys
that direction of law, with the knowledge that he is
likely thereby to cause injury to Z. A has committed
the offence defined in this section.
163. Whoever, being a public officer, and being as
Public officer
such public officer, charged with the preparation or framing an
incorrect
translation of any document, frames or translates that
document
document in a manner which he knows or believes to with intent
to cause
be incorrect, intending thereby to cause, or knowing it injury.
to be likely that he may thereby cause, injury to any
person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years,
or with fine, or with both.
Fraudulent or 164. Whoever, being a public officer,
Malicious employed in the Posts or Telecommunications
infraction of duty by
Department, fraudulently or maliciously secretes, makes
public officer in
Posts or away with, alters, or omits to transmit any message which
Telecommunications may have been lawfully delivered to him for transmission,
Department. or fraudulently or maliciously discloses to any person not
authorized to receive the same any message received by
him in the course of his employment as aforesaid, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description, which
may extend to a term of two years, or with fine, or with
both.
Misconduct by public 165. Whoever, being a public officer,
officer in employed in the Posts or Telecommunications
Posts or
Department, by drunkenness, carelessness, or other misconduct
Telecommunications
Department. endangers or delays the transmission of any message, letter,
or postal packet, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three
months or with fine which may extend to fifty rupees, or
with both.
Fraud by public 166. Whoever, being a public officer,
officer in employed in the Posts or Telecommunications
Posts or
Department, transmits by telegraph any message upon
Telecommunications
which the prescribed charge has not been paid, with intent
Department.
thereby do defraud, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both.
Injury to messages, 167. Whoever, being a public officer,
&c., commited by employed in the Posts or Telecommunications
public officer in
Department, does, contrary to his duty, secrete, destroy,
Posts or
mutilate, or break open any telegraph despatch or letter or
Telecommunications
Department. postal packet, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years,
or with fine, or with both.
Personating a public 168. Whoever pretends to hold any particular office,
officer. as a public officer, knowing that he does not hold such
office, or falsely personates any other person holding such
office, and in such assumed character does or attempts to
do any act under colour of such office, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
169. Whoever, not belonging to a certain class of Wearing garb
or carrying
public officers, wears any garb or carries any token token usded by
resembling any garb or token used by that class of public officers
with
public officers, with the intention that it may be fraudulent
believed, or with the knowledge that it is likely to be intent.
believed, that he belongs to that class of public officers,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either descrip-
tion for a term which may extend to three months, or
with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, or
with both.
CHAPTER IX A
OF OFFENCES RELATING To ELECTIONS
169A. For the purposes of this Chapter—
" Candidate"
and
(a) " candidate" means a person who has been " Electoral
nominated as a candidate at any election and right. "
includes a person who, when an election is in
contemplation, holds himself out as a prospec-
tive candidate thereat:
Provided that he is subsequently nominated
as a candidate at such election ;
(b) " electoral right" means the right of a person to
stand, or not to stand as, or to withdraw from
being, a candidate, or to vote or refrain from
voting at an election.
169B. (1) Whoever—
Bribery in
connection
(a) gives a gratification to any person with the object with an
of inducing him or any other person to exercise election.
any electoral right or of rewarding any person
for having exercised any such right; or
(b) accepts either for himself or for any other person
any gratification as a reward for exercising any
such right or for inducing or attempting to
induce any other person to exercise any such
right;
commits the offence of bribery:
Provided that a declaration of public policy or a pro-
mise of public action shall not be an offence under this.
section.
(2) A person who offers, or agrees to give, or officers
or attempts to procure, a gratification shall be deemed
to give a gratification.
(3) A person who obtains, or agrees to accept, or
attempts to obtain, a gratification shall be deemed to
accept a gratification, and a person who accepts a
gratification as a motive for doing what he does not
intend to do, or as a reward for doing what he has
not done, shall be deemed to have accepted the gratifi-
cation as a reward.
169C. (1) Whoever voluntarily interfers, or
Undue
influence at attempts to interfere, with the free exercise of any
elections. electoral right commits the offence of undue influence
at an election.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provi-
sions of subsection (1), whoever—
(a) threatens any candidate or voter, or any person
in whom a candidate or voter is interested,
with injury of any kind ; or
(b) induces or attempts to induce a candidate or
voter to believe that he or any person in whom
he is interested will become or will be ren-
dered an object of Divine displeasure or of
spiritual censure ;
shall be deemed to interfere with the free exercise
of the electoral right of such candidate or voter, within
the meaning of subsection (1).
(3) A declaration of public policy or a promise of
public action, or the mere exercise of a legal right
without intent to interfere with an electoral right, shall
not be deemed to be interference within the meaning
of this section.
169D. (1) Whoever at an election applies for a
Personation
at elections. voting paper or votes in the name of any other person,
whether living or dead, or in a fictitious name, or who
having voted once at such election applies at the same
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
election for a voting paper in his own name, and
whoever abets, procures, or attempts to procure, the
voting by any person in any such way commits the
offence of personation at an election.
(2) For the purposes of this section, the word
" election " includes any proceeding in which a poll
or ballot is taken for the purpose of ascertaining the
opinion of the majority of any specified set of persons
on any question held under or by virtue of any
enactment or any rules or regulations made
thereunder.
169E. Whoever committs the offence of bribery Punishment
for bribery
shall be liable on summary conviction to a fine not
exceeding five hundred rupees :
Provided that bribery by treating shall be punished
with a fine not exceeding two hundred rupees.
Explanation—" Treating" means that form of bribery
where the gratification consists in food, drink, enter-
tainment, or provision.
169F. Whoever commits the offence of undue Punishmnent
for undue
influence at an election shall be liable on summary
influence or
conviction to a fine not exceeding five hundred rupees, personation
at an election.
and
whoever commits the offence of personation at an
election shall be liable on summary conviction to a fine
not exceeding three hundred rupees.
169G. Whoever with intent to affect the result of an False statement
election makes or publishes any statement purporting in connection
with an
to be a statement of fact which is false and which he election.
either knows or believes to be false or does not believe
to be true, in relation to the personal character or
conduct of any candidate, shall be guilty of an offence
and shall be punished with fine.
169H. Whoever being required by any law for the
Failure to
time being in force or any rule having the force of law keep election
accounts.
to keep accounts of expenses incurred at or in connec-
tion with an election, fails to keep such accounts,
shall on conviction be punished with fine which may
extend to three hundred rupees.
CHAPTER X
OF CONTEMPTS OF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY
OF PUBLIC OFFICERS
Abscondng 170. Whoever absconds in order to avoid being
to avoid served with a summons, notice, or order proceeding
service of
summons or from any public officer, legally competent, as such
other public officer, to issue such summons, notice, or order,
proceeding
from a public shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
officer. which may extend to one month, or with fine which
may extend to fifty rupees, or with both; or, if the
summons, notice, or order is to attend in person or by
agent, or to produce a document in a Court,
with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine whch may extend
to one hundred rupees, or with both.
Preventing 171. Whoever in any manner intentionally
service of
prevents the serving on himself, or on any other
summons or
other person, of any summons, notice, or order proceeding
proceeding or
from any public officer legally competent, as such
preventing
publication public officer to issue such summons, notice, or order,
thereof.
or intentionally prevents the lawful affixing to any
place of any such summons, notice, or order,
or intentionally removes any such summons, notice,
or order from any place to which it is lawfully
affixed,
or intentionally prevents the lawful making of any
proclamation under the authority of any
public officer legally competent, as such pub-
lic officer, to direct such proclamation to be
made,
sliall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one month, or with fine which
may extend to fifty rupees, or with both ;
or, if the summons, notice, or order, or proclamation
is to attend in person or by agent, or to produce
a document in a Court, with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to
six months, or wtth fine which may extend to
one hundred rupees, or with both.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
172. Whoever, being legally bound to attend in Non-
person or by an agent at a certain place and time in attendance
obedience to a summons, notice, order, or proclamation in obedience
to an order
proceeding from any public officer legally competent,
from the public
as such public officer, to issue the same,
intentionally omits to attend at that place or time,
or departs from the place where he is bound to
attend before the time at which it is lawful for him
to depart,
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one month, or with fine which
may extend to fifty rupees, or with both;
or, if the summons, notice, order, or proclamation is
to attend in person or by agent in a Court,
with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine
which may extend to one hundred rupees, or
with both.
Illustrations
(a) A, being legally bound to appear before the Supreme
Court at Colombo, in obedience to a summons, inten-
tionally omits to appear. A has committed the offence
defined in this section.
(b) A, being legally bound to appear before a District
Judge as a witness in obedience to a. summons issued
by 'that District Judge, intentionally omits to appear.
A has committed the offence defined in this section.
173. Whoever, being legally bound to produce or
Omission to
deliver up any document to any public officer, as produce a
document to
such, intentionally omits so to produce or deliver up a public
the same, shall be punished with simple imprisonment officer by a
person legally
for a term which may extend to one month, or with
bound to
fine which may extend to fifty rupees, or with both; produce such
or, if the document is to be produced or delivered
up to a Court, with simple imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine which may extend to one
hundred rupees, or with both.
Illustrations
A, being legally bound to produce a document before a
District Court, intentionally omits to produce the
same. A has committed the offence defined in this
section.
Omission to 174. Whoever, being legally bound to give any
give notice or notice or to furnish information on any subject to any
information
to a public public officer, as such, intentionally omits to give
officer by a
such notice or to furnish such information in the
person legally
bound to manner and at the time required by law, shall be
give notice or
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which
infomation.
may extend to one month, or with fine which may
extend to fifty rupees, or with both;
or, if the notice or information required to be given
respects the commission of an offence, or is
required for the purpose of preventing the
commission of an offence, or in order to the
apprehension of an offender, with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to
six months, or with fine which may extend to
one hundred rupees, or with both.
Furnishing 175. Whoever, being legally bound to furnish
false
information. information on any subject to any public officer, as
such, furnishes, as true, information on the subject
which he knows or has reason to believe to be false,
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine which
may extend to one hundred rupees, or with both;
or, if the information which he is legally bound to
give respects the commission of an offence, or
is required for the purpose of preventing the
commission of an offence, or in order to the
apprehension of an offender, with imprison-
ment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years or with fine, or with
both.
Illustration
A, a landowner, knowing of the commission of a murder
within the limits of his estate, wilfully misinforms the
Magistrate of the division that the death has occurred
by accident in consequence of the bite of a snake. A
is guilty of the offence defined in this section.
Refusing oath 176. Whoever refuses to bind himself by an oath
when duly
required to or an affirmation to state the truth, when required so
take oath by to bind himself by a public officer legally competent
a public
officer. to require that he shall so bind himself, shall be
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which
may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to one hundred rupees, or with both.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
177. Whoever being legally bound to state the Refusing to
answer a
truth on any subject to any public officer, refuses to public officer
answer any question demanded of him touching that authorized to
question.
subject by such public officer, in the exercise of the
legal powers of such public officer, shall be punished
with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend
to one hundred rupees, or with both.
178. Whoever refuses to sign any statement made Refusing to
sign statement.
by him, when required to sign that statement by a
public officer legally competent to require that he
shall sign that statement, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
months, or with fine which may extend to one hundred
rupees, or with both.
179. Whoever, being legally bound by an oath or an False statement
on oath to
affirmation to state the truth on any subject to any
public officer
public officer or other person authorized by law to or person
authorized to
administer such oath or affirmation, makes to such administer
public officer or other person as aforesaid, touching an oath.
that subject, any statement which is false, and which
he either knows or believes to be false or does not
believe to be true, shall be punished with imprison-
ment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, and shall also be liable to a
fine.
180. Whoever gives to any public officer any False
information which he knows or believes to be false, information
with intent to
intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely cause a public
that he will thereby cause, such public officer to use officer to
use his lawful
the lawful power of such public officer to the injury power to the
injury of
or annoyance of any person, or to do or omit anything
another
which such public officer ought not to do or omit, if person.
the true state of tacts respecting which such informa-
tion is given were known by him, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
Illustrations
(a) A informs the Inspector-General of Police that Z,
a police officer, has been guilty of neglect of duty or
misconduct, knowing such information to be false,
and knowing it to be likely that the information will
cause the Inspector-General to dismiss Z. A has
committed the offence defined in this section.
(b) A falsely inform, a public officer that Z has con-
traband salt in a secret place, knowing such informa-
tion to be false and knowing that it is likely that the
consequence of the information will be a search of
Z's premises, attended with annoyance to Z. A has
committed the offence defined in this section.
Resistance to 181. Whoever offers any resistance to the taking of
taking of
property by any property by the lawful authority of any public
the lawful officer, knowing or having reason to believe that he
authority of
a public is such public officer, shall be punished with imprison-
officer. ment of either description for a term which may extend
to six months, or with fine which may extend to one
hundred rupees, or with both.
Obstructing 182. Whoever intentionally obstructs any sale of
sale of
property offered for sale by the lawful authority of
property
offered for any public officer, as such, shall be punished with
sale by
authtority of imprisonment of either description for a term which
a public may extend to one month, or with fine which may
officer.
extend to one hundred rupees, or with both.
Obstructing 183. Whoever voluntarily obstructs any public
public officer
in discharge officer or any person acting under the lawful orders
of his public of such public officer in the discharge of his public
functions.
functions, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to
three months, or with fine which may extend to one
hundred rupees, or with both.
Ommision to 184. Whoever, being bound by law to render or
assist public
officer when furnish assistance to any public officer in the
bound by law
execution of his public duty, intentionally omits to
to give
assistance. give such assistance, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
month, or with fine which may extend to fifty rupees,
or with both;
and if such assistance be demanded of him by a
public officer legally competent to make such
demand for the purposes of executing any
process lawfully issued by a Court,
or of preventing the commission of an offence,
or of suppressing a riot, unlawful assembly, or
affray, or of apprehending a person charged
PENAL CODE [Cap.19
with or guilty of an offence or of having
escaped from lawful custody, shall be punished
with simple imprisonment for a term which
may extend to six months, or with fine which
may extend to one hundred rupees, or with
both.
185. Whoever, knowing that by an order Disobedience
to an order
promulgated by a public officer lawfully empowered
duly promul-
to promulgate such order, he is directed to abstain from gated by a
public
a certain act, or to take certain order with certain
officer.
property in his possession or under his management,
disobeys such direction,
shall, if such disobedience causes or tends to cause
obstruction, annoyance, or injury, or risk of
obstruction, annoyance, or injury, to any
persons lawfully employed, be punished with
simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one month, or with fine which may
extend to fifty rupees, or with both ;
and if such disobedience causes or tends to cause
dagger to human life, health, or safety, or
causes or tends to cause a riot or affray, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine which may extend to one
hundred rupees, or with both.
Explanation—It is not necessary that the offender should
intend to produce harm, or contemplate his
disobedience as likely to produce harm. It is sufficient
that he knows of the order which he disobeys, and
that his disobedience produces, or is likely to produce
harm.
Illustration
An order is promulgated by a public officer lawfully
empowered to promulgate such order, directing that a
religious procession shall not pass down a certain street.
A knowingly disobeys the order, and thereby causes
danger of riot. A has committed the offence defined
in this section.
186. Whoever holds out any threat of injury to any Threat of
injury to a
public officer, or to any person in whom he believes public
that public officer to be interested, for the purpose of officer.
inducing that public officer to do any act, or to forbear
or delay to do any act, connected with the exercise of
the public functions of such public officer, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.
Threat of 187. Whoever holds out any threat of injury to any
injury to
induce any person for the purpose of inducing that person to
person to
refrain or desist from making a legal application, for
refrain from
applying for protection against any injury, to any puublic officer
protection
to a public legally empowered as such to give such protection or to
officer. cause such protection to be given, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with
both.
CHAPTER XI
OF FALSE EVIDENCE AND OFFENCES AGAINST
PUBLIC JUSTICE
Giving "false 188. Whoever, being legally bound by an oath or
evidence". affirmation, or by any express provision of law to state
the truth, or being bound by law to make a declara-
tion upon any subject, makes any statement which is
false, and which he either knows or believs to be false,
or does not believe to be true, is said to give " false
evidence ".
Wherever in any enactment the word " perjury"
occurs, such enactment shall be read as if the words
" giving false evidence " were therein used instead of
the word "perjury".
Explanation 1.—A, statement is within the meaning of
this section whether it is made verbally or otherwise.
Explanation 2.—A false statement as to the belief of the
person attesting is within the meaning of this section,
and a person may be guilty of giving false evidence
by stating that he believes a thing which he does not
believe, as well as by stating that he knows a thing
which he does not know.
Illustrations
(a) A, in support of a just claim which B has against
Z for one thousand rupees, falsely swears on a trial
that he heard Z admit the justice of B's claim. A has
given false evidence.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
(b) A, being bound by an oath to state the truth, states
that he believes a certain signature to be the hand-
writing of Z, when he does not believe it to be the
handwriting of Z. Here A states that which he knows
to be false, and therefore gives false evidence.
(c) A, knowing the general character of Z's handwriting,
states that he believes a certain signature to be the
handwriting of Z, A in good faith believing it to be so.
Here A's statement is merely as to his belief, and is
true as to his belief, and therefore, although the signa-
ture may not be the handwriting of Z, A has not given
false evidence.
(d) A, being bound by an oath to state the truth, states
that he knows that Z was at a particular place on a
particular day, not knowing anything upon the subject.
A gives false evidence, whether Z was at that place
on the day named or not.
(e) A, an interpreter or translator, gives or certifies as
a true interpretation or translation of a statement or
document which he is bound by oath to interpret or
translate truly, that which is not and which he does
not believe to be a true interpretation or translation
A has given false evidence.
189. Whoever causes any circumstance to exist, or "Fabricating
false evidence".
makes any false entry in any book or record, or makes
any document containing a false statement, intending
that such circumstance, false entry, or false statement
may appear in evidence in a judicial proceeding, or in
a proceeding taken by law before a public officer as
such, or before an arbitrator, and that such circums-
tance, false entry, or false statement, so appearing in
evidence, may cause any person, who in such proceed-
ing is to form an opinion upon the evidence, to enter-
tain an erroneous opinion touching any point material
to the result of such proceeding, is said " to fabricate
false evidence ".
Illustrations
(a) A puts jewels into a box belonging to Z, with the
intention that they may be found in that box, and that
this circumstance may cause Z to be convicted of theft.
A has fabricated false evidence.
(b) A makes a false entry in his shop book for the
purpose of using it as corroborative evidence in a
Court. A has fabricated false evidence.
(c) A, with the intention of causing Z to be convicted
of a criminal conspiracy, writes a letter in imitation of
z's handwriting, purporting to be addressed to an
accomplice in such criminal conspiracy, and puts the
letter in a place which he knows that the officers of
the police are likely to search.A has fabricated false
Punishment for 190. Whoever intentionally gives false evidence in
giving or any stage of a judicial proceeding, or fabricates false
fabricating false evidence for the purpose of being used in any stage of a
evidence.
judicial proceeding, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine ;
and whoever intentionally gives or fabricates false
evidence in any other case shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
Explanation 1. — A trial before a court-martial or before a
military court of requests is a judicial proceeding.
Explanation 2.— An investigation directed by law, preliminary to
a proceeding before a Court, is a stage of a judicial
proceeding, though that investigation may not take place be-
fore a Court.
Illustration
A, in an inquiry before a Magistrate for the purpose of
ascertaining whether Z ought to be committed for trial, makes
on oath a statement which he knows to be false. As this
inquiry is a stage of a judicial proceeding, A has given false
evidence.
Explanation 3.— An investigation directed by a Court according
to law, and conducted under the authority of a Court, is a stage
of a judicial proceeding, though that investigation may not take
Illustration
A, in an inquiry before an officer deputed by a Court to ascertain
on the spot the boundaries of land, makes on oath or
affirmation a statement which he knows to be false. As this
inquiry is a stage of a judicial proceeding, A has given false
evidence.
191. Whoever gives or fabricates false evidence,
Giving or
fabricating flase intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that
evidence with intent he will thereby cause, any person to be convicted of an
to procure offence which is punishable with death by this Code, shall
conviction of a
be punished which rigorous imprisonment for a term
capital offence.
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine;
If innocent person and if an innocent person be convicted and executed in
be thereby consequence of such false evidence, the person
convicted and
who gives such false evidence shall be punished
executed.
with death.
PENAL CODE [ Cap.19
192. Whoever gives or fabricates false evidence
Giving or
intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely fabricating false
that he will thereby cause, any person to be convicted of evidence with intent
an offence which by this Code is not capital, but to procure
conviction of an
punishable with imprisonment for a term of seven years
offence punishable
or upwards, shall be punished as a person convicted of with imprisonment
that offence would be liable to be punished. for seven years or
upwards.
Illustration
A gives false evidence before a Court, intending thereby to cause
Z to be convicted of a robbery. The punishment of robbery is
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten
years, with or without fine. A, therefore, is liable to such
imprisonment, with or without fine.
193. Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use as
Using evidence
true or genuine evidence any evidence which he knows
known to be false.
to be false or fabricated shall be punished in the same
manner as if he gave or fabricated false evidence.
194. Whoever issues or signs any certificate required
Issuing or signing a
by law to given or signed, or relating to any fact of which
false certificate.
such certificate is by law admissable in evidence,
knowing or believing that such certificate is false in
any material point, shall be punished in the same
manner as if he gave false evidence.
195. Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use any
Using as a true
such certificate as a true certificate, knowing the same
certificate one
to be false in any material point, shall be punished in the known to be false in
same manner as if he gave false evidence. a material point.
196. Whoever, in any declaration made or subscribed
False statement
by him, which declaration any Court, or any public made in any
officer or other person, is bound or authorized by law to declaration which
receive, makes any statement which is false, and which is by law
receivables as
he either knows or believes to be false or does not
evidence.
believe to be true, touching any point material to the
object for which the declaration is made or used, shall
be punished in the same manner as if he gave false
evidence.
Using as true l97. Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use as
any such
declaration true any such declaration, knowing the same to be
known to be false in any material point, shall be punished in the
false.
same manner as if he gave false evidence.
Explanation.—A declaration which is inadmissible merely
upon the ground of some informality is a declaration
within the meaning of sections 196 and 197.
Causing 198. Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe
disappearance
of evidence of that an offence has been committed, causes any evi-
an offence dence of the commission of that offence to disappear
committed, or
giving false with the intention of screening the offender from legal
information punishment, or with that intention gives any informa-
touching it,
to screen the tion respecting the offence which he knows or believes
offender.
to be false,
If a capital shall, if the offence which he knows or believes to
offence.
have been committed is punishable with death,
be punished with imprisonment of either des-
cription for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine;
If punishable and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment
with ten years'
imprisonment. which may extend to ten years, shall be punish-
ed with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to three years, and
shall also be liable to fine ;
If punishable and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment
with less than
ten years' for any term not extending to ten years, shall
imprisonment. be punished with imprisonment of the descrip-
tion provided for the offence, for a term which
may extend to one-fourth part of the longest
term of the imprisonment provided for the
offence, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration
A, knowing that B has murdered Z, assists B to hide the
body with the intention of screening B from punish-
ment. A is liable to imprisonment of either description
for seven years, and also to fine.
lntentional 199. Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe
ommission to
give that an offence has been committed, intentionally omits
information to give any information respecting that offence which
of an offance
by a person he is legally bound to give, shall be punished with
bound to imprisonment of either description for a term which
inform.
may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
200. Whoever knowing .or having reason to believe Giving false
information
that an offence has been committed, gives any infor- respecting an
offence
mation respecting that offence which he knows or
committed.
believes to be false, shall be punished with imprison-
ment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
201. Whoever secretes or destroys any document Destruction of
document to
which he may be lawfully compelled to produce as prevent its
evidence in a Court, or in any proceeding production as
evidence.
lawfully held before a public officer as such, or
obliterates or renders illegible the whole or any part
of such document with the intention of preventing the
same from being produced or used as evidence before
such court or public officer as aforesaid, or after he
shall have been lawfully summoned or required to
produce the same for that purpose, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both.
202. Whoever falsely personates another, and in such False
personation
assumed character makes any admission or statement, for the purpose
or confesses judgment, or causes any process to be of any act or
proceeding in
issued, or becomes bail or security, or does any other a suit.
act in any suit or criminal prosecution, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to three years, or with fine,
or with both.
203. Whoever fraudulently removes, conceals, trans- Fraudulent
removal or
fers, or delivers to any person any property or any
concealment
interest therein intending thereby to prevent that of property to
prevent its
property or interest therein from being taken as a seizure as a
forfeiture, or in satisfaction of a fine under a sentence forfeiture or
in execution
which has been pronounced, or which he knows to be of a decree.
likely to be pronounced, by a Court or other
competent authority, or from being taken in execution
of a decree or order which has been made or which he
knows to be likely to be made by a Court in
a civil suit, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both.
Fraudulent
claim to 204. Whoever fraudulently accepts, receives, or
property to claims any property or any interest therein, knowing
prevent its
seizure as a that he has no right or rightful claim to such property
forfeiture or or interest, or practices any deception touching any
in execution
of a decree. right to any property or any interest therein, intending
thereby to prevent that property or interest therein
from being taken as a forfeiture or in satisfaction of
a fine, under a sentence which has been pronounced,
or which he knows to be likely to be pronounced, by
a Court or other competent authority, or
from being taken in execution of a decree or order
which has been made or which he knows to be likely
to be made by a Court in civil suit, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to two years, or with fine,
or with both.
Fradulently
suffering a 205. Whoever fraudulently causes or suffers a
decree for a decree or order to be passed against him at the suit of
sum not due.
any person for a sum not due, or for a larger sum that
is due to such person, or for any property or interest
in property to which such person is not entitled, or
fraudulently causes or suffers a decree or order to be
executed against him after it has been satisfied, or for
anything in respect of which it has been satisfied, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.
Illustrations
A institutes a suit against Z. Z, knowing that A is likely
to obtain a decree against him, fraudulently suffers
a judgment to pass against him to a larger amount
at' the suit of B, who has no just claim against him,
in order that B, either on his own account or for
the benefit of Z, may share in the proceeds of any sale
of Z's property which may be made under A's
decree. Z has committed an offence under this
section.
Fraudulently 206. Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly or with
or dishonestly
making a intent to injure or annoy any person, makes in a Court
false claim in
any claim which he knows to be false, shall
a Court.
be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
PENAL CODS [Cap. 19
207. Whoever fraudulently obtains a decree or Fraudulently
obtaining a
order against any person for a sum not due, or for a decree for a
larger sum than is due, or for any property or interest sum not due.
in property to which he is not entitled, or fraudulently
causes a decree or order to be executed against any
person after it has been satisfied, or for anything in
respect of which it has been satisfied, or fraudulently
suffers or permits any such act to be done in his name,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either descrip-
tion for a term which may extent to two years, or
with fine, or with both.
208. Whoever, with intent to cause injury to any False charge
of offence
person, institutes or causes to be instituted any made with
criminal proceeding against that person, or falsely intent to
injure,
charges any person with having committed an offence,
knowing that there is no just or lawful ground for
such proceeding or charge against that person, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both;
and if such criminal proceeding be instituted on a
false charge of an offence punishable with
death, or imprisonment for seven years or
upwards, shall be punished with imprison-
ment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
209. Whenever an offence has been committed, Harbouring
whoever harbours, conceals, assists, or maintains a an offender.
person whome he knows or has reason to believe to be
the offender, with the intention of screening him from
legal punishment,
shall, if the offence is punishable with death, be If a capital
punished with imprisonment of either descrip- offence.
tion for a term which may extend to five
years, and shall also be liable to fine;
and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment If punishable
with ten years'
which may extend to ten years, shall be
imprisonment.
punished with imprisonment of either descrip-
ton for a term which may extend to three
years, and shall also be liable to fine;
If punishable and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment
with less than
which may extend to one year and not to ten
ten years'
i mprisonment. years, shall be punished with imprisonment of
the description provided for the offence for a
term which may extend to one-fourth part of
the longest term of imprisonment provided
for the offence, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—This provision shall not extend to any case in
which the harbour or concealment is by the husband or wife
of the offender.
Illustration
A, knowing that B has committed robbery, knowingly
conceals B in order to screen him from legal punish-
ment. Here, as B is liable to imprisonment which may
extend to ten years, A is liable to imprisonment of
either description for a term not exceeding three
years, and is also liable to fine.
Taking grati- 210. Whoever accepts, or attempts to obtain, or
fication, &c., agrees to accept any gratification for himself or any
to screen an
offender from other person, or any restitution of property to himself
punishment. or any other person in consideration of his concealing
an offence, or of his screening any person from legal
punishment for any offence, or of his not proceeding
against any person for the purpose of bringing him to
legal punishment,
If capital shall, if the offence is punishable with death, be
offence. punished with imprisonment of either descrip-
tion for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine;
If punishable and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment
with ten years' which may extend to ten years, shall be
imprisonment.
punished with imprisonment of either descrip-
tion for a term which may extend to three
years, and shall also be liable to fine;
If punishable and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment
with less than not extending to ten years, shall be punished
ten years'
imprisonment. with imprisonment of the description provided
for the offence for a term which may extend
to one-fourth part of the longest term of
imprisonment provided for the offence, or
with fine, or with both;
If punishable and if the offence is punishable with fine, shall be
with fine. punished with fine.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
211. Whoever gives or causes, or offers or agrees to Offering
gratification
give or cause, any gratification to any person, or to or restoration
of property
restore or cause the restoration of any property to any
in consideration
person in consideration of that person's concealing an of screening
offender.
offence, or of his screening any person from legal
punishment for any offence, or of his not proceeding
against any person for the purpose of bringing him
to legal punishment,
shall, if the offence is punishable with death, be If a capital
offence.
punished with imprisonment of either descrip-
tion for a term which may extened to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine;
and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment If puiushable
with ten years'
which may extend to ten years shall be
imprisonment.
punished with imprisonment of either descrip-
tion for a term which may extend to three
years, and shall also be liable to fine;
and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment If punishable
with less than
not extending to ten years, shall be punished ten years'
with imprisonment of the description provided imprisonment.
for the offence for a term which may extend
to one-fourth part of the longest term of
imprisonment provided for the offence, or with
fine, or with both ;
and if the offence is punishable with fine, shall be If punishable
punished with fine. with fine.
Exception.—The provisions of sections 210 and 211 do not
extend to any case in which the offence may lawfully be
compounded.
212. Whoever takes or agrees or consents to take Taking grati-
fication to
any gratification under pretence or on account of help- help to recover
ing any person to recover any movable property of stolen
property, &c.
which he shall have been deprived by any offence
punishable under this Code, shall, unless he uses all
means in his power to cause the offender to be
apprehended and convicted of the offence, be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both.
Harbouring 213. Whenever any person convicted of or charged
an offender with an offence, being in lawful custody for that
who has
escaped from offence, escapes from such custody, or whenever a
custody or
whose appre- public officer, in the exercise of the lawful powers
hension has of such public officer, orders to certain person to be
been ordered.
apprehended for an offence, whoever, knowing of
such escape or order for apprehension, harbours or
conceals that person with the intention of preventing
him from being apprehended, shall be punished in the
manner following, that is to say,
If a capital if the offence for which the person was in custody
offence.
or is ordered to be apprehended is punishable
with death, he shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years and shall
also be liable to fine ;
If punishable if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for
with ten years' a term which may extend to ten years, he shall
imprisonment.
be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to
three years, with or without fine.
and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment
If punishable
with less which may extend to one year and not to ten
than ten years'
impisonment. years, he shall be punished with imprisonm ent
of the description provided for the offence for
a term which may extend to one-fourth part
of the longest term of the imprisonment
provided for such offence, or with fine, or with
both.
Exception.—This provision does not extend to the case in
which the harbour or concealment is by the husband or wife
of the person to be apprehended.
Public officer 214. Whoever, being a public officer knowingly
disobeying a disobeys any direction of the law as to the way in
direction of
law with intent which he is to conduct himself as such public officer,
to save person intending thereby to save, or knowing it to be likely
from punish-
ment or that he will thereby save, any person from legal
property from
punishment or subject him to a less punishment than
rorfeiture.
that to which he is liable, or with intent to save, or
knowing that he is likely thereby to save, any property
from forfeiture or any charge to which it is liable by
law, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years,
or with fine, or with both.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
215. Whoever, being a public officer and being, Public
officer
as such public officer, charged with the preparation of framing an
incorrect
any record or other writing, frames that record or
record or
writing in a manner which he knows to be incorrect, writing
with intent
with intent to cause, or knowing it to be likely that to save
he will thereby cause, loss or injury to the public or to person from
punishment
any person, or with intent thereby to save, or knowing or property
it to be likely that he will thereby save, any person from forfeiture.
from legal punishment, or with intent to save or know-
ing that he is likely thereby to save any property
from forfeiture or other charge to which it is liable by
law, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine, or with both.
216. Whoever, being a public officer, legally bound Intentional
omission to
as such public officer to apprehend or to keep in apprehend on
confinement any person charged with or liable to be the part of a
public officer
apprehended for an offence, intentionally omits to bound by law
to apprehend,
apprehend such person, or intentionally suffers such
person to escape, or intentionally aids such person in
escaping or attempting to escape, from such confine-
ment shall be punished as follows, that is to say—
(a) with imprisonment of either description for a Punishment.
term which may extend to seven years, with
or without fine, if the person in confinment
or who ought to have been apprehended was
charged with or liable to be apprehended for
an offence punishable with death ; or
(b) with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years, with or
without fine, if the person in confinement or
who ought to have been apprehended was
charged with or liable to be apprehended for
an offence punishable with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to ten years ; or
(c) with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to two years, with or
without fine, if the person in confinement or
who ought to have been apprehended was
chraged with or liable to be apprehended for
an offence punishable with imprisonment for
a term less than ten years.
Intentional 217. Whoever, baing a public officer , legally bound
omission to
apprehend on as such public officer to apprehend or to keep in
the part of a confinement any person under sentence of a Court
public officer
bound by for any offence, or if the person was lawfully
law to committed to custody, intentionally omits to apprehend
apprehend
person under such person, or intentionally suffers such person to
sentence or
escape or intentionally aids such person in escaping or
lawfully
committed. attempting to escape from such confinement, shall be
punished as follows, that is to say—
Punishment. (a) with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to fourteen years,
with or without fine, if the person in confine-
ment or who ought to have been apprehended
is under sentence of death; or
(b) with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to seven years, with
or without fine, if the person in confinement
or who ought to have been apprehended is
subject, by a sentence of a Court, or
by virtue of a commutation of such sentence,
to imprisonment for a term of ten years or
upwards; or
(c) with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years, or with
fine, or with both, if the person in confinement,
or who ought to have been apprehended, is
subject, by a sentence of a Court, to
imprisonment for a term not extending to ten
years, or if the person was lawfully committed
to custody.
Escape from 218. Whoever, being a public officer legally bound
confinement as such public officer to keep in confinement any
of custody
negligently person charged with or convicted of any offence or
suffered by a lawfully committed to custody, negligently suffers
public
officer. such person to escape from confinement, shall be
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
219. Whoever intentionally offers any resistance or
Resistance or
obstruction illegal obstruction to the lawful apprehension of
by a person himself for any offence with which he is charged or
to his lawful
apprehension. for which, he has been convicted, or escapes or attempts
to escape from any custody in which he is lawfully
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
detained for any such offence, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—The punishment in this section is in addition
to the punishment for which the person to be apprehended
or detained in custody was liable for the offence with which
he was charged, or of which he was convicted.
219A. Whoever intentionally offers any resistance Resistance or
or illegal obstruction to the lawful apprehension of obstruction to
lawful appre-
himself or of any other person on any civil process hension under
a civil
issued by any competent Court, or who
process.
escapes or attempts to escape from any custody in
which he is lawfully detained on such process, or who
rescues or attempts to rescue any other person from
any custody in which that person is lawfully detained
on such process, shall be guilty of an offence, and shall
on conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding one Punishment
hundred rupees, or to simple or rigorous imprisonment
for any term not exceeding six months, or to both.
220. Whoever intentionally offers any resistance or Resistance or
illegal obstruction to the lawful apprehension of any obstruction
to the lawful
other person for an offence, or rescues or attempts to apprehension
of another
rescue any other person from any custody in which
person.
that person is lawful detained for an offence, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description
Punishment.
for a term which may extend to two years or with fine,
or with both ; or
if the person to be apprehended, or the person
rescued, or attempted to be rescued, is charged
with or liable to be apprehended for an offence
punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to ten years, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either descrip-
tion for a term which may extend to three
years, and shall also be liable to fine ; or
if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or
attempted to be rescued, is charged with or
liable to be apprehended for an offence punish-
able with death, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine ; or
if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or
attempted to be rescued, is liable, under the
sentence of a Court, or by viture of
a commutation of such a sentence, to imprison-
ment for a term of ten years or upwards, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine ; or
if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or
attempted to be rescued, is under sentence of
death, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term not exceeding
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Resistance, 220A. Whoever, in any case not provided for in
obstruction, sections 219, 219A, 220 or in any other law for the time
escape or rescue
in cases not being in force, intentionally offers any resistance or
otherwise provi-
illegal obstruction to the lawful apprehension of him-
ded for.
self or of any other person, or escapes or attempts to
escape from any custody in which he is lawfully
detained, or rescues or attempts to rescue any other
person from any custody in which that person is law-
fully detained, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine, or with both.
Escape from 221. Whoever escapes or attempts to escape from
lawful custody.
any custody in which he is lawfully detained for failing
to furnish good security for the peace or good
behaviour, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to one
year, or with fine, or with both.
Violation of 222. Whoever, having accepted any conditional
condition of pardon or remission of punishment, knowingly violates
remission of
punishment. any condition on which such remission was granted,
shall, if his original sentence is one of death, be
punished with imprisonment of either description
which may extend to twenty years, and if his original
sentence be not one of death, be punished with the
punishment to which he was originally sentenced if
he has already suffered no part of punishment, and
if he has suffered any part of the punishment,
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
then with so much of that punishment as he has not
already suffered.
223. Whoever intentionally offers any insult or Intentional
insult or
causes any interruption to any public officer, while interruption
such public officer is sitting in any stage of a judicial of a public
officer,
proceeding, shall be punished with simple imprison- sitting in any
stage of a
ment for a term which may extend to six months, or
judicial
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, proceeding.
or with both.
224. Whoever, by personation or otherwise, shall Personation
of a juror or
intentionally cause or knowingly suffer himself to be assessor.
returned, empanelled, or sworn as juryman or assessor
in any case in which he knows that he is not entitled
by law to be so returned, empanelled or sworn, or
knowing himself to have been so returned, empanelled,
or sworn contrary to law, shall voluntarily serve on
such jury or as such assessor, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
CHAPTER XII
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN AND
GOVERNMENT STAMPS
225. "Coin" is a metal used as money stamped and issued Meaning of
by the authority of the Government of Ceylon or under the "coin" and "current
Monetary Law Act (Chapter 422), or any enactment in operation coin".
for the time being relating to the issue of coins in Sri Lanka or [§ 2,6 of 1968.]
by the authority of the Government of any foreign country in
order to be so used.
"Current coin" means coin which is lawfully current in Sri
Lanka or in any foreign country.
Illustrations
(a) Cowries are not coin.
(b) Lumps or bars of unstamped metal, though used as
money, are not coin.
(c) Medals are not coin, inasmuch as they are not intended
to be used as money.
Counterfeiting 226. Whoever counterfeits or knowingly performs
coin. any part of the process of counterfeiting coin shall be
punished with imprisoment of either description for a
term which may extened to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
Explanation—A person commits this offence who, intend-
ing to practise deception, or knowing it to be likely that
deception will thereby be practised, causes a genuine
coin to appear like a different coin.
Counterfeiting 227. Whoever counterfeits or knowingly performs
current coin. any part of the process of counterfeiting current coin
[§ 3, 54 of 1939.]
shall be punished with imprisonment of either descrip-
tion for a term which may extend to ten years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
Making or 228. Whoever makes or mends, or performs any
selling instru- part of the process of making or mending, or buys, sells,
ment for
counterfeiting or disposes of any die or instrument for the purpose of
coin. being used, or knowing or having reason to believe that
it is intended to be used, for the purpose of counter-
feiting coin, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
229. Whoever makes or mends, or performs any
Making or
sellig instru- part of the process of making or mending or buys,
ment for
counterfeiting sells, or disposes of any die or instrument for the pur-
current coin. pose of being used, or knowing or having reason to
believe that it is intended to be used, for the purpose
[§3,54 of 1939.] of counterfeiting current coin, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
230. Whoever is in possession of any instrument or
Possession of
instrument or material for the purpose of using the same for
material for
the purpose counterfeiting coin, or knowing or having reason to
of using the believe that the same is intended to be used for that
same for
purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to
three years, and shall also be liable to fine ;
and if the coin to be counterfeited is current coin,
[§3, 54 of 1939.]
shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
231. Whoever, being within Sri Lanka, abets the Abetting in
counterfeiting of coin out of Sri Lanka, shall be punished
c
S
o
r
u
i
n
L
te
a
r
n
f
k
e
a
it
,
i n
t
g
he
in the same manner as if he abetted the counterfeiting out of Sri Lanka
of such coin within Sri Lanka. of coin.
232. Whoever imports into Sri Lanka, or exports there-
Import or
from any counterfeit coin, knowing or having reason export of
counterfeit
to believe that the same is counterfeit, shall be coin.
punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to three years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
233. Whoever imports into Sri Lanka, or exports there- Import or
export of
from, any counterfeit current coin, knowing or having
counterfeit
reason to believe that the same is counterfeit, shall be of current
coin.
punished with imprisonment of either description for
[§4, 54 of 1939.]
a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
234. Whoever, having any counterfeit coin, which Delivery to
another of
at the time he became possessed of it he knew to be counterfeit
counterfeit, fraudulently, or with intent that fraud coin possessed
with the
may be committed, delivers the same to any person, or knowledge
that it is
attempts to induce any person to receive it, shall be
counterfeit.
punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to five years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
235. Whoever, having any counterfeit current coin, Delivery of
current coin
which at the time he became possessed of it he knew possessed
to be counterfeit, fraudulently, or with intent that with the
knowledge
fraud may be committed, delivers the same to any that it is
counterfeit.
person or attempts to induce any person to receive it,
[§ 5, 54 of 1939.]
shall be punished with imprisonment of either descrip-
tion for a term which may extend to ten years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
236. Whoever delivers to any other person as Delivery to
another of
genuine, or attempts to induce any other person to coin as
receive as genuine, any counterfeit coin which he genuine
which
knows to be counterfeit, but which he did not know to when first
possessed the
be counterfeit at the time when he took it into his deliverer did
possession, shall be punished with imprisonment of not know
to be
either description for a term which may extend to two counterfeit.
years, or with fine to an amount which may extend
to ten times the value of the coin counterfeited, or
with both.
Possession of 237. Whoever, fraudulently or with intent that
counterfeit
coin by a fraud may be committed, is in possession of counter-
person who feit coin, having known at the time when he became
knew it to be
counterfeit possessed thereof that such coin was counterfeit, shall
when he
bcecame be punished with imprisonment of either description
possessed for a term which may extend to three years, and shall
thereof.
also be liable to fine.
Possession of 238. Whoever, fraudulently or with intent that
counterfeit
current coin fraud may be committed, is in possession of counterfeit
by a person current coin, having known at the time when he
who knew it
to be counter- became possessed thereof that such coin was counter-
feit when he
feit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
became
possed description for a term which may extend to seven
hereof.
[§ 6,54 of 1939.] years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Fraudulently 239. Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly performs
or dishonestly on any coin any operation which diminishes the weight
diminishing
the weight or or alters the composition of that coin, shall be punished
altering the with imprisonment of either description for a term
composition
of any coin. which may extend to three years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
Explanation—A person who scoops out part of the coin
and puts anything else into the cavity alters the
composition of that coin.
240. Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly performs
Fraudulently
or dishonestly on any current coin any operation which diminishes
diminishing the
weight or the weight or alters the composition of that coin, shall
altering the be punished with imprisonment of either description
composition
of current for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall
coin.
also be liable to fine.
[§ 7 ,54 of 1939]
241. Whoever performs on any coin any operation
Altering
appearance of which alters the appearance of that coin with the
any coin with
intention that the said coin shall pass as a coin of a
intent, that it
shall pass as different description, shall be punished with imprison-
a coin of a
different ment of either description for a term which may
description. extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
242. Whoever performs on any current coin any Altering
appearance of
operation which alters the appearance of that coin current coin
with intent
with the intention that the said coin shall pass as a
that it shall
coin of a different description, shall be punished with pass as a coin
of a different
imprisonment of either dsecription for a term which description.
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to [§7,54 of l939]
fine.
243. Whoever, having coin in his possession with Delivery to
another of
respect to which the offence defined in sections 239 or coin possessed
with the
241 has been committed, and having known at the time
knowledge
when he became possessed of such coin that such offence that it is
altered.
had been committed with respect to it, fraudulently,
or with intent that fraud may be committed, delivers
such coin to any other person, or attempts to induce
any other person to receive the same, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
244. Whoever, having coin in his possession with Delivery of
coin with the
respect to which the offence defined in section 240 or knowledge
242 has been committed, and having known at the time that it is
altered.
when he became possessed of such coin that such offence
has been committed with respect to it, fraudulently, or
with intent that fraud may be committed, delivers such
coin to any other person, or attempts to induce any
other person to receive the same, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
245. Whoever, fraudulently, or with intent that Possession of
altered coin
fraud may be committed, is in possession of coin with
by a person
respect to which the offence defined in either of the who knew it
to be altered.
sections 239 or 241 has been committed, having known when he
became
at the time of becoming possessed thereof that such
possessed
offence had been committed with respect to such coin, thereof.
shall be punished with imprisonment of either descrip-
tion for a term which may extend to three years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
Possession of 246. Whoever, fraudulently or with intent that
current coin fraud may be committed is in possession of current
by a person
who knew it coin, with respect to which the offence defined in
to be altered
either of the sections 240 or 242 has been committed,
when he
became having known at the time of becoming possessed
possessed
thereof. thereof that such offence had been committed with
[§ 8,54 of 1939.] respect to such current coin, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
Delivery to 247. Whoever delivers to any other person as
another of genuine, or as a coin of a different description from
coin as
genuine which it is, or attempts to induce any person to receive
which when
as genuine or as a different coin from which it is, any
first possessed
the deliverer coin in respect of which he knows that any such opera-
did not know
to be altered. tion as that mentioned in sections 239, 240, 241, or 242
has been performed, but in respect of which he did not
at the time when he took it into his possession know
that such operation had been performed, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to two years, or with fine
to an amount which may. extend to ten times the value
of the coin for which the altered coin is passed or
attempted to be passed.
Counterfeiting 248 .* Whoever counterfeits, or knowingly performs
a Government
stamp. any part of the process of counterfeiting, any stamp
issued by Government for the purpose of revenue,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either descrip-
tion for a term which may extend to fifteen years, and
shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation—A person commits this offence who counter-
feits by causing a genuine stamp of one denomination
to appear like a genuine stamp of a different denomi-
nation.
Having 249. * Whoever has in his possession any instrument
possession of
an instrument or material for the purpose of being used, or knowing
or material
or having reason to believe that it is intended to be
for the
purpose of used, for the purpose of counterfeiting any stamp
counterfeiting
a Government
stamp.
* Sections 248 to 256 apply to Savings Stamps in like manner as those
provisions apply to stamps issued by the Government for purposes of
revenue.-Section 74 (3) of the National Savings Bank Act.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
issued by Government for the purpose of revenue
shall be punished with imprisonment of either descrip-
tion for a term which may extend to seven years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
250. * Whoever makes, or performs any part of the Making or
process of making, or buys, or sells, or disposes of selling instru-
ment for the
any instrument for the purpose of being used, or know- purpose of
counterfeiting
ing or having reason to believe that it is intended to a Government
be used, for the purpose of counterfeiting any stamp stamp.
issued by Government for the porpose of revenue,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either des-
cription for a term which may extend to seven years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
251. * Whoever sells, or offers for sale, any stamp Sale of
counterfeit
which he knows or has reason to believe to be a Government
counterfeit of any stamp issued by Government for stamp.
the purpose of revenue, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
252. * Whoever has in his possession any stamp Having
possession of
which he knows to be a counterfeit of any stamp a counterfeit
Government
issued by Government for the purpose of revenue
stamp.
intending to use or dispose of the same as a genuine
stamp, or in order that it may be used as a genuine
stamp, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
253. * Whoever uses as genuine any stamp, knowing Uaing as
genuine a
it to be a counterfeit of any stamp issued by Govern-
Government
ment for the purpose of revenue, shall be punished stamp known
to be
with imprisonment of either description for a term counterfeit.
which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or
with both.
* Sections 248 to 256 apply to Savings Stamps in like manner as those
provisions apply to stamps issued by the Government for purposes of
revenue.-Secdon 74 (3) of the National Savings Bank Act.
Effacing any 254.* Whoever, fraudulently or with intent to cause
writing from
loss to the Government, removes or effaces from any
a substance
bearing a substance bearing any stamp issued by Government
Governnment for the puropse of revenue any writing or document
stamp or
removing for which such stamp has been used, or removes from
from a docu-.
any writing or document a stamp which has been used
ment a stamp
used for it for such writing or document, in order that such stamp
with intent to
cause loss to may be used for a different writing or document,
Government. shall be punished with imprisonment of either descrip-
tion for a term which may extend to three years, or
with fine, or with both.
Using 255. * Whoever, fraudulently or with intent to cause
Government loss to the Government, uses for any purpose a stamp
stamp known
to have been issued by Government for the purpose of revenue,
before used. which he knows to have been before used, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to two years, or with fine,
or with both.
Erasure of 256. * Whoever, fraudulently or with intent to cause
mark denoting loss to Government, erases or removes from a stamp
that stamp has
been used. issued by Government for the purpose of revenue any
mark put or impressed upon such stamp for the
purpose of denoting that the same has been used, or
fraudulently or with such intent alters any such mark,
or knowingly has in his possession, or sells, or dispo-
ses of, any such stamp from which such mark has
been erased or removed, or on which such mark has
been altered, or sells or disposes of any such stamp
which he knows to have been used, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both.
Scope of the 256A. In sections 248 to 256, both inclusive, the
expression word "Government" when used in connection with
"Government" or in reference to, any stamp issued for the purpose
in sections 248 of denoting a rate of postage shall, notwithstanding
* Sections 248 to 256 apply to Savings Stamps in like manner as those
provisions apply to stamps issued by the Government for purposes of
revenue.-Section 74 (3) of the National Savings Bank Act.
PENAL CODE [Cap. 19
anything in section 14, be deemed to include Government of
Sri Lanka.
Explanation-The word "stamp" where used in this Chapter includes
postage stamps.
CHAPTER XIII
OF OFFENCES RELATING To WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
*257. Whoever fraudulently uses any weighing or Fraudulent
use of false
measuring instrument, which he knows to be false,
weighing or
shall be punished with imprisonment of either descrip- measuring
instrument.
tion for a term which may extend to one year, or
[§ 60,37 of 1946]
with fine, or with both.
*258. Whoever fraudulently uses any false weight or Fraudulent
use of false
false measure of length or capacity, or fraudulently
weight or
uses any weight or any measure of length or capacity measure.
as a different weight or measure from what it is, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to one year, or with
fine, or with both.
*259. Whoever is in possession of any false weighing Being in
or measuring instrument, or of any false weight, or of possession of
false weights
any false measure of length or capacity, intending or measures.
that the same may be fraudulently used, shall be [§60.37 of 1946.]
punished with imprisonment of either descrip'tion for
a term, which may extend to one year, or with fine,
or with both.
*260. Whoever makes, sells, or disposes of any Making or
selling false
weighing or measuring instrument, or any weight, or
weights or
any measure of length or capacity which he knows to measures.
be false, in order that the same may be used as true, [§ 60,37 of 1946.]
or knowing that the same is likely to be used as true,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either descrip-
tion for a term which may extend to three years, or
with fine, or with both.
[TRUNCATED: processed first 80 of 166 pages]