REGISTRATION OF DOCUMENTS
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND AND CONSOLIDATE THE LAW RELATING TO THE
REGISTRATION OF DOCUMENTS.
Ordinance Nos,
23 of 1927
19 of 1928
22 of 1930
14 of 1936
34 of 1939
13 of 1947
Law Nos, 4
of 1974
14 of 1974
19 of 1976
Act Nos,
6 of 1949
16 of 1951
22 of 1958
11 of 1963
27 of 1969
50 of 1982
5 of 1990
48 of 2011
21 of 2013
32 of 2022
18 of 2024
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
Short title. 1. This Ordinance may be cited as the Registration of Documents
Ordinance.
Land registries. 2.(1) There shall continue to be in Colombo a land register office for the
purposes of this Ordinance and the Land Registration Ordinances, No. 5 of
1877 and No. 4 of 1889, with branch offices at such places as the Minister
may from time to time direct, and the land register office and branch
offices established under the land Registration Ordinance, 1891, or any
enactment repealed by that Ordinance shall be deemed to be duly
established under this Ordinance.
(2) The business of the land register office and branch offices shall be
conducted by a Registrar-General of Lands (in this Ordinance called the
'Registrar-General'), a Deputy Registrar-General of Lands and such
number of Assistant Registrars-General (in this Ordinance called
'Assistant Registrars-General') and Registrars of Lands (in this
Ordinance called 'Registrars') as the Minister may from time to time
consider necessary. Acting appointments may be made as may be
necessary in the event of the Registrar-General or the Deputy Registrar-
General of Lands or any Assistant Registrar-General or Registrar
being ill or incapable of acting or temporarily absent from duty.
(3) All appointments under this section shall be made, and may at any time
be revoked, in accordance with the law for the time being in force
relating to the appointment of public officers: Provided that in the
case of death, illness, incapacity, absence from duty, or other emergency,
the Registrar-General may appoint any person to act as a Registrar for not
more than thirty days at any one time and may at any time revoke such
appointment.
(4)All appointments under this section shall be notified in the Gazette.
(5) All appointments made under the Land Registration Ordinance,
1891, shall be deemed to have been made under this Ordinance.
(6) The Registrar-General may, if he thinks fit, exercise all or any of the
powers possessed by a Registrar.
(7) Subject to the directions of the Registrar-General, any matter or
thing which by this Ordinance or any regulation may or is to be done by
the Registrar-General may also be done by a Deputy Registrar-General
or any Assistant Registrar-General. (* Omitted from this edition. Repealed
by Ordinance No. 23 of 1927. t See Law No. 23 of 1978.) (*Repealed by
Ordinance No. 23 of 1927. the Order published in Gazette No. 8,796 of
26th September, 1941. under section 2 (1) of the Government Gazette
(Publication) Ordinance, exempting notification in the Gazette. ** See
Law No. 23 of 1978.)
Definitions of 3.In this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires, 'land' includes
Land. things attached to the earth or permanently fastened to anything attached to
[2, 4 of 1974] the earth and any estate or interest in land, and a mortgage of or
charge on land. (Section 2A is repealed by Law No. 4 of 1974)
CHAPTER II
REGISTRATION OF DUPLICATES OF DEEDS, &c.
Duplicates to be 4.(1) Every District Judge, Judge of a Primary Court, or Justice of the
transmitted to Peace shall, on or before the fifteenth day of each month, deliver or
Registrar. transmit to the Registrar of the district wherein he resides the duplicates
of all deeds or other instruments executed before him during the
previous month under the provisions of the Deeds and Documents
(Execution before Public Officers) Ordinance, together with two copies
of a list of such duplicates, and, if the land affected by any such deed or
instrument is situated in a district other than that in which he resides, he
shall also on or before the day aforesaid transmit or deliver an attested
copy of the deed or instrument to the Registrar of the last-mentioned
district.
(2) Every public officer by or before whom any document affecting land is
executed shall, if subsection (1) of this section does not apply thereto, on
or before the fifteenth day of the following month deliver or transmit a
duplicate or an attested or certified copy thereof to the Registrar of
each district in which the land affected thereby is situated together with
two copies of a list of all duplicates or copies so delivered by him.
Registrar to bind 5.(1) Every Registrar shall from time to time cause all duplicates and
all duplicates. copies transmitted or delivered to him under the preceding section or
any other written law, or by any notary under the provisions of the
Notaries Ordinance, to be bound in convenient volumes distinguished
by the name of the court to which the judge is attached, or by the name
of the Justice or notary who attested the deed or instrument, or, in the
case of duplicates or copies transmitted or delivered under subsection
(2) by the official designation of the public officer by or before whom
the deed or instrument was executed, and shall keep and preserve the
same in his office.
(2) All duplicates and copies transmitted or delivered to a Registrar or
bound in volumes under the corresponding provision in the Land
Registration Ordinance, 1891,* or any enactment repealed by that
Ordinance shall be deemed to have been so transmitted, delivered, or
bound under this Chapter.
CHAPTER III
REGISTRATION OF INSTRUMENTS AFFECTING LAND
Meaning of 6.In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, 'instrument' means
"instrument" an instrument affecting land.
Unregistered 7.(1) An instrument executed or made on or after the 1st day of January,
instruments void 1864, whether before or after the commencement of this Ordinance
against subsequent shall, unless it is duly registered under this Chapter, or, if the land has
registered come within the operation of the Land Registration Ordinance, 1877f, in
instruments. the books mentioned in section 26 of that Ordinance, be void as against
all parties claiming an adverse interest thereto on valuable consideration by
virtue of any subsequent instrument which is duly registered under this
Chapter, or, if the land has come within the operation of the Land
Registration Ordinance, 1877,f in the books mentioned in section 26 of
that Ordinance.
(2) But fraud or collusion in obtaining such subsequent instrument or in
securing the prior registration thereof shall defeat the priority of the
person claiming thereunder.
(3) An instrument duly registered before the commencement of this
Ordinance, under the Land Registration Ordinance, 1891,* or any
enactment repealed by that Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been
duly registered under this Chapter.
(4) Registration of an instrument under this Chapter shall not cure any
defect in the instrument or confer upon it any effect or validity which it
would not otherwise have except the priority conferred on it by this
section. (* Repealed by Ordinance No. 23 of 1927. t Omitted from this
edition.)
Meaning of 8.For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following instruments shall be
affecting lands. deemed to affect land, namely:
[2, 18 of 2024]
(a) if executed or made before the commencement of this Ordinance,
every deed or other instrument of sale, purchase, transfer, assignment, or
mortgage of any land, or of promise, bargain contract, or agreement for
effecting any such object, or for establishing or transferring any security,
interest, or incumbrance affecting any land (other than a lease at will, or
for any period not exceeding one month); or of contract or agreement
for the future sale or purchase or transfer of any land; and every deed or
act of release, surrender, or annulment of or affecting any such deed or
other instrument, and every will disposing of any land, and every
grant of administration, affecting any land; and every judgment or order
of court affecting land;
(b) if executed or made after the commencement of this Ordinance, all
instruments, including wills, decrees and orders of any court or
authority, and awards, which purport or operate to create, confer,
declare, limit, assign, transfer, charge, incumber, release, or extinguish
any right, title, or interest, whether vested or contingent, past, present, or
future, to, in or over land, or which create or record or are evidence
of any contract for effecting any such object, and also a notice of seizure
issued under section 237 of the Civil Procedure Code:
Provided that paragraph (b) of this section shall not apply to:
(i) any decree or order of court where the action in which the decree or
order is made has been duly registered as a lis pendens;
(ii) a writ of execution issued under section 225 of the Civil Procedure
Code;
(iii) any letters of administration to the estate of an intestate;
(iv) a decree or order adjudging a person to be insolvent or bankrupt;
(v) a decree, order, or other instrument appointing or recording,
certifying, or confirming the appointment or election of an assignee or
trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy;
(vi) any document relating to shares in a registered company
notwithstanding that the assets of the company consist in whole or in
part of land;
(vii) a mortgage or debenture by a registered company, so long as its
only effect, as respects the land affected thereby, is to create a floating
charge thereon in such form that the company can, until the security is
enforced, dispose of the land in the ordinary course of its business free
from the mortgage or debenture;
(viii) any debenture issue by any such company the only effect of which,
as respects the land affected thereby, is to entitle the holder to the
benefit of the security afforded by a duly registered instrument;
(ix) any endorsement upon or transfer of any debenture specified in (vii) or
(viii);
(x) any receipt for payment of money due under a mortgage or charge;
(xi) any instrument if the only interest in land created or dealt with
thereby is a tenancy at will or for a period not exceeding one month or
determinable by the landlord by not more than one month's notice;
(xii) any agreement in relation to a transaction which is subject to the
provisions of the Secured Transactions Act, No. 17 of 2024.
Registration of 9.(1) A notice under section 237 of the Civil Procedure Code, of a seizure
notice of seizure. of land effected after the commencement of this Ordinance is an
instrument affecting the land seized and may be registered under this
Ordinance.
(2) A notice of a seizure effected before the commencement of this
Ordinance may also be registered under this Ordinance.
(3) Registration of a notice of seizure shall remain in force for six
months only from the date of registration but may be re-registered as
often as may be necessary.
(4) Registration of a notice of a seizure in the book kept under section
237 of the Civil Procedure Code, shall remain in force for six months
only from the commencement of this Ordinance. But the notice may be
re-registered under this Ordinance. No re-registration shall be effected
under section 237.
Will when defeated 10. (1) A will shall not, as against a disposition by any heir of the testator
by conveyance by of land affected by the will, be deemed to be void or lose any priority
heir. or effect by reason only that at the date of the disposition by the heir
the will was not registered under this Chapter.
(2) This section applies whether the testator died before or after the
commencement of this Ordinance, but does not apply-
(a) where the disposition by the heir was executed before the
commencement of this Ordinance; or
(b) where, at the time of the disposition by the heir, being not less than
one year after the death of the testator, letters of administration to the
estate of the testator have been granted on the footing that he died
intestate.
Registration of lis 11.(1) No Us pendens affecting or relating to land instituted on or after the
pendens. 9th day of November, 1917, shall bind a purchaser, unless and until the
[2, 13 of 1947] Us pendens is duly registered under this Chapter.
(2) But a lis pendens duly registered before the commencement of this
Ordinance under the provisions of Ordinance No. 29 of 1917,* shall be
deemed to have been duly registered under this Chapter.
(3) In this section, 'purchaser' means any person (including a
mortgagee or lessee) who, for valuable consideration, takes any interest
in or charge on land.
(4) For the purpose of registering a lis pendens a document in the
prescribed form shall be presented for registration, and such document
shall be registered in the same manner as other instruments affecting land,
but shall be retained by the Registrar.
(5)A lis pendens may be registered at any time after the plaint has been
accepted by the court in accordance with the provisions of the Civil
Procedure Code.
(6) For the purpose of the application of the doctrine of Us pendens, an
action duly registered as Us pendens shall be deemed to be pending
from the time of registration notwithstanding that the summons has not
been served on the defendant.
(7) Where a Us pendens has been duly registered on a date before the
1st day of May, 1947, such registration shall continue in force until
such time as it is cancelled under section 33 of this Ordinance. (*
Repealed by Ordinance No. 23 of 1927.)
Books for 12.(1) Every Registrar shall prepare and keep the prescribed books for the
registration of registration of instruments, allotting to each book (which may be in as
instruments many volumes as necessary) a defined division of his province or
affecting land. district.
(2) The books for the registration of instruments established under the
Land Registration Ordinance, 1891,* or any enactment repealed by
that Ordinance shall continue to be used, and shall be deemed to be
kept under this Chapter. (* Repealed by Ordinance No. 23 of 1927.)
Mode of 13.(1) Every instrument (other than a will) presented for registration shall
description of embody therein or in a Schedule annexed thereto, an accurate and clear
lands in description of the land or immovable property affected thereby, its
instruments. [2, boundaries, extent and situation specifying the District, Pattu, Korale,
21 of 2013] Divisional Secretary's Division, local authority division and the Grama
[2, 48 of 2011] Niladari Division and the village, of the District in which the land is
[2, 50 of 1982] situated and in case the land or immovable property affected by this
instrument is situated in within any municipality, town or developed area,
declared under section 2 of the Municipal Councils Ordinance (Chapter
252), section 2 of the Urban Councils Ordinance (Chapter 255) and
section 2 of the Pradeshiya Sabha Act, No. 15 of 1987 respectively, the
assessment number and the name, if any, of the street, in which such
land or immovable property is situated.
(2) If the land consists of a divided portion of a land or allotment, such
portion shall be clearly and accurately defined by its particular
boundaries and extent.
(3) If the land consists of an undivided share in a land, the proportion
which the share bears to the entire land shall be staled, and a
description of the entire land shall be given as required by subsection
(1).
(4) A person desiring to register a will shall give to the Registrar a
written description or the land affected thereby which shall comply
with the provisions of subsections (1) to (3) of this section.
(5) Every Registrar shall refuse to register an instrument, other than a
will, which does not state the particulars required by the foregoing
provisions of this section.
(5A) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Registrar under
subsection (5) may, within thirty days of such decision being
communicated to him, appeal to the Registrar-General who may vary
or reverse such decision if it is shown to his satisfaction-
(a) that the description is sufficient to enable the land to be identified
with reasonable certainty; or
(b) that it was impracticable to insert the required particulars in the
instrument.
(5B) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Registrar-General
under subsection (5A) may, within thirty days from the date of such
decision being communicated to him, institute in any District Court
having jurisdiction a suit against the Registrar-General praying for the
variation or reversal of such decision.
(6) Where the description of the land affected by an instrument
executed or made after the commencement of this Ordinance is not
contained in a schedule to the instrument, a fee of ten rupees or such
other amount as may be prescribed by the Minister, shall be payable
for the registration in addition to any other fee which may be payable:
Provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed so as to
apply or affect any grant or lease of State land made or executed after
the commencement of this Ordinance.
(7) There shall be typewritten or written in ink at the head of every
instrument (except a will) presented for registration a reference to the
volume and folio in which some earlier instrument relating to the same
land is registered if such reference is known to the notary who
prepared the instrument, or, if the instrument was not prepared by a
notary, if such reference is known to the person presenting the instrument
for registration.
Instruments to be 14.(1) Every instrument presented for registration shall be registered in
registered in proper the book allotted to the division in which the land affected by the
folio. instrument is situated and in the folio in which the first registered
[2, 14 of 1974] instrument affecting the same land is registered, or in another folio
(whether of the same volume or of another volume) bearing a separate
number, opened in continuation thereof, cross reference being entered
in the prescribed manner so as to connect the said folios:
Provided that-
(a) an instrument may, if the Registrar thinks fit, be entered in a new
folio, cross references being entered in the prescribed manner so as to
connect the registration with any previous registration affecting the
same land or any part thereof;
(b) where no instrument affecting the same land has been previously
registered, the instrument shall be registered in a new folio to be
allotted by the Registrar; and
(c) where a new division of a Registrar is created wholly or partly out
of a division (hereinafter referred to as the 'old division') of another
Registrar, then, in regard to lands which before the date of creation of
the new division were wholly or partly within the old division which
on and after that date constitutes the new division or, as the case may
be, within such part of the old division as on and after that date
constitute a part of the new division,-
(i) such of the folios of the book (hereinafter referred to as the 'old book')
allotted under section 12 to the old division as contain registrations of
instruments affecting any of those lands shall be deemed to form part
of the book (hereinafter referred to as the 'new book') allotted under that
section to the new division; and
(ii) a registration of an instrument affecting any such land made in the
new book and registrations of instruments affecting that land made in
the old book shall be connected by cross references made in the
prescribed manner in the new book and the old book.
(2) An instrument, whether registered before or after the
commencement of this Ordinance, shall not be deemed to be duly
registered under this Chapter unless it is registered in accordance with the
foregoing provisions of this section.
(3) Every order made after the commencement of this Ordinance under
section 4 of Ordinance No. 1 of 1897* entitled 'An Ordinance relating
to claims to Forest, Chena, Waste, and Unoccupied Lands' and
embodying therein an agreement between the Divisional Secretary of
the Divisional Secretary's Division or the special officer appointed
under section 28 of that Ordinance and the claimant shall be registered
in a new folio to be allotted by the Registrar, and an instrument
affecting land dealt with by the agreement and registered after
registration of the order shall not be deemed to be duly registered
under this Chapter unless it is registered in or in continuation of the
folio in which the order is registered.
(* Repealed by Ordinance No. 20 of 1931. See section 4 of the
Transfer of Powers (Divisional Secretaries) Act, No. 58 of 1992.)
Method of 15.Registration of an instrument shall be effected by entering the
registration. prescribed particulars in the proper folio.
Repealed by 16.Repealed by [3, 18 of 2024]
[3, 18 of 2024]
CHAPTER V
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO INSTRUMENTS AFFECTING
LAND
Meaning of 25.In this Chapter, unless the conte xt otherwise requires, 'instrument'
"instrument". means an instrument affecting land.
[5, 18 of 2024]
Who may present 26.(1) An instrument may be presented for registration by
instrument for
(a) any person executing the instrument;
registration.
(b) any person claiming any interest or benefit thereunder;
(c) any person having any interest in or charge on any property affected
thereby; or
(d) the agent of any such person or a attorney-at-law or notary acting
on behalf of any such person.
(2) Either the original or a duly attested or certified copy of the
instrument may be presented for registration: Provided that, in the case of
a will, the probate or letters of administration with a copy of the will
annexed shall be presented for registration.
(3) An instrument may be presented for registration through the post or
under cover if it is accompanied by the appropriate fee, if any.
Day book. 27.(1) Each Registrar shall keep a book to be called the 'day book', in
which shall be entered the prescribed particulars of every instrument
presented for registration with the day and hour and, if required by the
person presenting the instrument, the minute of presentation, and for
the purpose of priority the time of presentation shall be taken as the
time of registration.
(2) An instrument presented for registration through the post or under
cover shall be deemed to have been presented for registration at the
time when the packet containing the instrument is opened.
Return of 28.(1) After registration, the Registrar shall endorse the instrument in the
instruments. prescribed manner and return it on demand to the person who
presented it for registration or his agent.
(2) If the return of an instrument is not claimed within six months from
the time of registration or, in the case of an instrument registered
before the commencement of this Ordinance, within six months from
such commencement, then
(a) the Registrar shall send the instrument by unregistered letter
addressed to the person who presented it for registration at his last
known place of abode or business; or
(b) if his address is unknown, the Registrar shall retain the instrument for
a further period of six months, and if the instrument is still unclaimed,
the Registrar-General may order it to be destroyed.
(3) When an instrument is destroyed, the Registrar shall make a note to
that effect in the prescribed form in the day book at the place where the
particulars of the instrument were entered on its presentation for
registration.
Land situated in 29.(1) An instrument which affects land situated in more districts than one
several districts. may be presented for registration to the Registrar of each such district,
[6, 18 of 2024] or to the Registrar-General.
(2) The Registrar-General shall, if the instrument is presented to him,
instruct each Registrar concerned as to the entry to be made in the
register by him.
(3) For the purpose of determining the time of registration, the receipt
by a Registrar of the instructions of the Registrar-General shall be
deemed to be the receipt of the instrument for registration.
(4) When the instrument has been registered by all the Registrars
concerned, the Registrar-General shall endorse the instrument in the
prescribed manner and return it on demand to the person who
presented it for registration and section 28 shall apply to the
instrument.
Priority notices. 30.(1) Any person (in this section called a 'transferee') acquiring or
proposing to acquire for valuable consideration from any other person
(in this section called the 'transferor') any interest or benefit in any land
may before the execution of the instrument by the transferor with his
written consent, or after the execution of the instrument by the
transferor without such consent, present for registration a notice (in
this Ordinance called a 'priority notice') of his intention to register the
instrument.
(2) If, at any time while a priority notice remains in force, any
instrument is registered whereby the transferee or a person deriving
title under him acquires for valuable consideration from the transferor
or a person deriving title under him any interest or benefit in the land
described in the priority notice, such instrument shall, for the purposes
of this Ordinance, be deemed to have been registered at the time of
registration of the priority notice.
(3) No instrument executed by the transferor while priority notice
registered with his written consent remains in force and affecting any
land described in the priority notice shall, except with the written consent
of the transferee, be registered while the priority notice remains in
force.
(4) The Registrar shall, on receiving a priority notice, register it in the
same manner as other instruments, but shall retain the notice.
(5) A priority notice shall remain in force for six weeks from the date
of registration of the notice, but may at any time before the end of such
six weeks, before the execution of the instrument by the transferor with
his written consent, or after the execution of the instrument by the
transferor without such consent, be renewed by the transferee or a
person deriving title under him for a further period of six weeks, and if so
renewed shall remain in force for a further period of six weeks computed
from the end of the first period of six weeks.
(6) If an instrument is not registered pursuant to a priority notice while
the notice remains in force, the priority notice shall be deemed to have
lapsed and shall have no effect under the provisions of this Ordinance.
(7) This section shall apply to a decree, order, or will affecting land in
like manner as it applies to any other instrument, except that a priority
notice as to a decree, or order may not, except with the leave of the
court, be lodged before delivery in court of the judgment, and a priority
notice as to a will may not be lodged until after the death of the
testator.
Seizure property 31.(1) When a writ of execution is issued, the judgment creditor may, so long
notices. as the judgment remains unsatisfied, present for registration a notice (in
this Ordinance called a 'seizure priority notice') to the effect that the land
described therein is liable to seizure under the writ of execution.
(2) If, at any time while the seizure priority notice remains in force,
notice of seizure of any land described in the seizure priority notice is
registered, notice of the seizure shall, for the purposes of this
Ordinance and of section 238 of the Civil Procedure Code, be deemed
to have been registered at the time of registration of the seizure priority
notice or at the time when the seizure was actually effected, whichever
date shall be the later, and shall have effect accordingly.
(3) The Registrar shall, on receiving a seizure priority notice, register it in
the same manner as other instruments, but shall retain the notice.
(4) A seizure priority notice shall remain in force for six weeks from
the date of registration of the notice, but may, at any time before the
end of such six weeks, be renewed for a further period of six weeks,
and if so renewed shall remain in force for a further period of six
weeks computed from the end of the first period of six weeks.
(5) If notice of a seizure under the writ of execution is not registered
while the seizure priority notice remains in force, the seizure priority
notice shall be deemed to have lapsed and shall have no effect under
the provisions of this Ordinance.
Caveats. 32.
[2, 32 of 2022]
(1)
(a)A person (hereinafter referred to as the 'caveator') who
(i) has a right, title or interest; or
(ii) claims to have a right, title or interest,
to a land, an undivided land, a land parcel or a condominium parcel
(hereinafter in this section referred to as the 'land') may present for
registration a caveat substantially in Form VIII of the Second Schedule
hereto requiring him to be served a notice of the presentation for
registration of any instrument affecting such land.
(b) Every caveat presented for registration shall -
(i) be in duplicate and accompanied by an affidavit of the caveator
together with a certificate issued by an Attorney-at-law substantiating
the right, title or interest in the land or claims to a right, title or interest in
the land of the caveator;
(ii) be accompanied by such number of copies of the notice set out in
Form X of the Second Schedule hereto together with stamped
envelopes, to be served on the owners of the land whose names and
addresses are given in the relevant volume and folio in which such land is
registered, where the caveator is not the owner;
(iii) be accompanied by a certified copy of the original of the Power of
Attorney duly registered with the Registrar General or the Registrar of
the relevant Land Registry or the Registrar of Title (hereinafter in this
section referred to as the 'Registrar') where the caveator is a holder of a
Power of Attorney (hereinafter in this section referred to as the
'attorney'); and
(iv) contain the name, signature and the National Identity Card number or
the passport number or the driving licence number and address of the
caveator in Sri Lanka at which notices relating to the caveat shall be
served, the date of the caveat, the names and addresses of the
persons to whom the notice of the caveat shall be sent where the caveator
is not the owner, the right, title or interest in the land claimed by the
caveator, grounds in support of the claim and the description of the land,
including the boundaries, indicating the correct volume and folio in
which such land, is registered.
(c) For the purpose of this section -
(i) 'caveator' includes a body of persons, a beneficiary under any trust
affecting a land, the lawful guardian or the next friend of a minor or of
a person of unsound mind or mentally deficient person, an attorney of a
person, a judgement creditor, an executor or an administrator of an
estate of a deceased, or a legal heir, or an intended purchaser who has
entered into an agreement with the owner of a land or a developer of a
land;
(ii) 'condominium parcel' means a condominium parcel registered
under the Registration of Title Act, No.21 of 1998 in terms of section
10 of the Apartment Ownership Law, No.11 of 1973 or registered
under this Ordinance; and
(iii) 'interest' includes an interest arising from an unregistered deed or
instrument relating to a land which is incapable of immediate registration,
a trust, an inheritance either by testate or intestate succession,
instruments relating to a mortgage or an agreement to sell, co-ownership,
an ownership arising from a condominium parcel or the estate of a minor,
or of a person of unsound mind or mentally deficient person.
(1A) The Registrar, on being satisfied that all required documents and
information referred to in paragraph (b) of subsection (1) are provided
by the caveator, shall acknowledge the receipt of such caveat and
record the prescribed particulars referred to in subsection (1) of section
27.
(1B) Upon the acknowledgement, the Registrar shall forthwith notify
the persons, whose names and addresses have been furnished by the
caveator under subparagraph (iv) of paragraph (b) of subsection (1)
and shall make an endorsement in the Remark Column by inserting the
date and the names of the persons to whom and the addresses to which
the notices referred to in subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (b) in
subsection (1) were sent.
(2) The Registrar shall on receiving a caveat register it in the same
manner as other instruments, but shall retain the caveat.
(3)A caveat shall be in force for a maximum period of two years.
(4) Where an instrument affecting the same land described in the
caveat has been subsequently presented for registration, a notice shall
be given to the caveator in Form XI of the Second Schedule hereto and
shall be sent by registered letter to the address mentioned in the caveat.
(5) If, while a caveat is in force, an instrument affecting the land
described in the caveat is presented for registration, and in an action
commenced by the caveator in a competent court within sixty days
from posting of the notice required by subsection (4) it is proved to the
satisfaction of the court that the instrument presented for registration is or
was at the time of registration void or voidable by the caveator or
fraudulent as against him or in derogation of his lawful rights the court
may order the instrument to be rectified or cancelled as may be
necessary to preserve the rights of the caveator, and may order the
necessary correction to be made in the register.
(6) Nothing in this section shall affect any other power which may be
possessed by any court of ordering any instrument to be rectified or
cancelled.
Cancellation of 33.(1) Registration of a priority notice, seizure notice, seizure priority
priority notices, notice or lis pendens may be cancelled at the request in writing of the
seizure notices, person by whom or on whose behalf it was presented for registration.
seizure priority
(1A)
notices, caveats,
and lis pendens. (a) A caveat may be withdrawn or cancelled, as the case may be, at the
[3, 32 of 2022] request in writing -
(i) by the caveator;
(ii) by an attorney;
(iii) upon the death of a caveator, by an executor, administrator, or a legal
heir;
(iv) by the guardian or next friend of a minor of a person of unsound
mind or mentally deficient person on whose interest the caveat was
lodged, on the death or removal of the guardian, by the successor or by
the minor upon the minor attaining the age of majority;
(v) where there are joint caveators, and upon the death of one or more
of them, by the surviving caveator or caveators;
(vi) where the caveator is adjudicated a bankrupt, by the Official
Assignee;
(vii) where the caveator is a body corporate and is in liquidation, and
the estate or interest claimed by the caveator has become vested in
the
liquidator appointed by court, by the liquidator or by the Official
Receiver; or
(viii) where an order has been issued by a competent court on an estate
which is the subject of a caveat, by a Fiscal officer, or any other person
receiving the rights under such order.
(b) on receipt of the instrument for withdrawal under paragraph (a)
hereof, the Registrar shall-
(i) cancel the entry of the caveat in the register in the aforesaid manner
and setting out the date thereof, and
(ii) notify the persons or body of persons, whose right, title or interest for
registration of an instrument was affected by such caveat.
(2) A District Court may, on the application of any person interested in
any property affected by registration of a priority notice, seizure notice,
seizure priority notice, caveat, or Us pendens, if it is satisfied that the
registration was or has become unnecessary, order that the registration be
cancelled. An application under this subsection may be made in a suit
or summarily under Chapter XXIV of the Civil Procedure Code.
(2A) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other written law,
any summons, notice, decree nisi or order in relation to any proceeding
under subsection (2) on a caveat, shall be served to the address of the
caveator in Sri Lanka referred to in sub-paragraph (iv) of paragraph (b) of
subsection (1) of section 32.
(3)A cancellation under this section shall be registered by the Registrar
in the prescribed manner.
(4) The Registrar shall not register a caveat of the same caveator in
respect of the same land or same interest in the land, in respect of
which registration of caveat was cancelled under subsection (3).
Damages for 34.Any person injured by reason of the registration or renewal of a
unreasonable priority notice, seizure priority notice, caveat, or Us pendens without
priority notice, reasonable cause, or by unreasonable failure to request cancellation of
seizure priority registration of a priority notice, seizure priority notice, caveat, or Us
notice, caveat, or pendens may recover compensation from the person who applied for such
lis pendens. registration or renewal. A claim for such compensation may be joined
with an application for the cancellation of the notice, caveat, or Us
pendens or may be made by suit.
Correction of 35. (1) Where it is shown to the satisfaction of the Registrar-General that
errors. any error or omission has been made in registering any instrument,
[3, 50 of 1982] whether before or after the commencement of this Ordinance, the
Registrar-General shall issue notice in writing in the prescribed form
(a) in the case of a deed to the parties thereto; or
(b) in the case of a will to the executor or administrator, as the case
may be; or
(c) in the case of any other instrument to the person who presented it
for registration,
and order such error or omission to be corrected and the correction
shall then be made by the Registrar concerned in the prescribed
manner, but shall not affect any priority accrued before the correction
is made:
Provided that the Registrar-General may with like effect make such an
order for the correction of any error or omission made in registering
any such instrument if it is proved to his satisfaction by any person
interested that by reason of the death or legal incapacity of any person
or party to whom notice is required to be issued as aforesaid or for any
other sufficient cause whatsoever, such notice cannot be issued.
(2) When the error and correction are not in the same folio, they shall
be connected by cross references in the prescribed manner.
(3) A person aggrieved by the refusal of the Registrar-General to make an
order under this section may, within thirty days from the date of
such refusal being communicated to him, institute in the District
Court a suit praying for the variation or reversal of the decision of the
Registrar-General.
Grounds for 36.(1) A Registrar may, if he thinks fit, refuse to register an instrument-
refusing to register (a) where he has reason to suspect that the person presenting the
an instrument. instrument for registration is not a person who is authorized by this
Ordinance to present it for registration, until such person proves his
right to present it for registration;
(b) if it does not comply with the provisions of this Ordinance or any
written law affecting the form or mode of execution of such
instrument.
(2) A Registrar shall refuse to register an instrument-
(a) if it is liable to stamp duty, unless it is duly stamped;
(b) until any fee payable for registration has been paid.
Reasons for refusal 37. Every Registrar finally refusing to register an instrument shall make an
to be recorded. order of refusal and record his reasons for such order in the prescribed
book, and shall endorse the words 'registration refused' on the instrument,
and on application made by the person who presented the instrument
shall without payment or unnecessary delay give him a copy of the
reasons so recorded.
Appeals against 38.(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of a Registrar refusing to register
refusal. an instrument may, within thirty days from the date of the order being
communicated to him, appeal to the Registrar-General, who may vary
or reverse the order.
(2) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Registrar-General
under this section may, within thirty days from the date of such
decision being communicated to him, institute in the District Court a
suit against the Registrar-General praying for the variation or reversal
of the decision of the Registrar-General.
Power for District 39.Where it is shown to the satisfaction of a District Court that any
Court to cancel instrument registered under Chapters IE or IV is a forgery, or has been
registration. registered without due authority or in contravention of any provision of
this Ordinance, or where any instrument registered as aforesaid is
rectified or set aside by a competent court, the District Court may order
the registration of the instrument to be cancelled or to be rectified in
such manner as the circumstances may require, and may order the
original instrument to be brought into court and the endorsement of
registration thereon to be cancelled or altered.
CHAPTER VI
SUPPLEMENTARY
Copies of damaged 40. If any volume or any part of any volume of duplicates or copies in the
or illegible custody of a Registrar under Chapter II or any volume or any part of
volumes or part any volume of any book kept by a Registrar under this Ordinance shall
thereof. at any time be damaged or be in danger of becoming illegible, the
[5, 22 of 1958] Registrar-General may, if he thinks fit, direct a copy of the volume or part
so damaged or in danger of becoming illegible to be made, verified,
and certified in such manner as he may direct, and thereupon such copy
shall be substituted for, and shall for all the purposes of this
Ordinance (including this section) and every other written law be deemed
to be, the volume or part so damaged or in danger of becoming illegible.
Indexes. 41.Each Registrar shall keep such indexes of instruments a ffecting land
[7, 18 of 2024] registered by him as may from time to time be prescribed.
[8, 13 of 1947]
Searches and 42.Subject to the prescribed regulations, all duplicates and copies and all
copies. books and indexes kept under this Ordinance may be searched and
examined by any person claiming to be interested therein or by his
attorney-at-law or agent duly authorized thereto in writing, and
certified copies of or extracts from any such duplicate, copy, or book may
be obtained if required.
Evidence 43.(1) A copy or extract purporting to be certified under the hand of a
Registrar to be a true copy of or extract from any duplicate or copy
preserved under this Ordinance or of or from any book kept pursuant to
this Ordinance shall be admissible in evidence without proof of the
signature or appointment of the Registrar, and shall be prima facie
evidence of the contents of such duplicate, copy, or book for all
purposes and in all proceedings, civil or criminal, but subject to all just
and lawful exceptions.
(2) An endorsement by the Registrar in the prescribed form on a duplicate
of an application for registration of a Us pendens, or on a duplicate of a
priority notice or seizure priority notice or an application for renewal of
such a notice, or on a duplicate of a caveat shall be admissible in
evidence without proof of the signature or appointment of the
Registrar, and shall be prima facie evidence of registration of the Us
pendens, priority notice, or seizure priority notice or caveat or of the
renewal of the priority notice or seizure priority notice for all purposes
and in all proceedings, civil or criminal, but subject to all just and lawful
exceptions.
Destruction of 44.The document required to be retained by the Registrar when a priority
priority notices. notice, seizure priority notice, caveat, or Us pendens is registered may,
&c, alter expiry of unless its preservation is ordered by any court, be destroyed by him at any
registration. time after the expiry of two years from the termination of the period
during which the registration is in force.
Indemnity of 45. No Registrar shall be liable in damages by reason of anything in good
Registrars. faith done or refused in his official capacity.
Costs in suits 46.No order for the payment of costs by the Registrar-General shall be
against Registrar- made in any suit authorized by this Ordinance to be brought against
General. him.
Defect in 47.Nothing done in good faith pursuant to this Ordinance or the Land
appointment of Registration Ordinance, 1891,* or any enactment repealed by that
Registrars or Ordinance by any Registrar shall be deemed invalid by reason only of
procedure. a defect in his appointment or in procedure. (*Repealed by Ordinance No.
23 of 1927)
Fees. 48.The fees specified in the First Schedule as may be prescribed by the
[4, 21 of 2013] Minister, from time to time, shall be payable for the matters to which they
relate.
Power to make 49.(1) The Minister may make regulations, to be published in the Gazette, as
regulations. to any matter which by this Ordinance may or is to be prescribed
and generally for regulating the forms to be used and the procedure and
practice to be observed in carrying this Ordinance into effect.
(2) All such regulations shall, as soon as conveniently may be, be laid
before Parliament and may, at any of the next following three
meetings, be rescinded by resolution of Parliament but without
prejudice to anything already done thereunder, and if not so rescinded
shall be deemed to be valid.
Forms. 50.The forms contained in the Second Schedule shall be used with such
[4, 32 of 2022] variations as circumstances may require.