The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
THE CONSTITUTION
OF THE
DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC
OF SRI LANKA
(As amended up to 31st October 2022)
Revised Edition – 2023
Published by the Parliament Secretariat
i i The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
THE CONSTITUTION
OF THE
DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC
OF SRI LANKA
(As amended up to 31st October 2022)
Revised Edition – 2023
Published by the Parliament Secretariat
Printed at the Department of Government Printing
ii The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
Revised Edition – 2023
Published by the Parliament Secretariat
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka iii
This unofficial edition edited by the Bills Office of the Legislative
Services Department of Parliament of Sri Lanka reproduces the text
of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
as amended by Parliament from time to time up to the Twenty First
Amendment to the Constitution. The footnotes below the text indicate the
particular Amendments to the Constitution by which such Amendments
have been made.
iv The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka v
CONTENTS
Article Page
CHAPTER - I
THE PEOPLE, THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY
1 The State … … … 1
2 Unitary State … … … 1
3 Sovereignty of the People… … … 1
4 Exercise of Sovereignty… … … 1
5 Territory of the Republic … … … 2
6 The National Flag … … … 2
7 The National Anthem … … … 2
8 The National Day … … … 2
CHAPTER - II
BUDDHISM
9 Buddhism … … … 3
CHAPTER - III
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
10 Freedom of thought, conscience and religion … 4
11 Freedom from torture … … … 4
12 Right to equality … … … 4
13 Freedom from arbitrary arrest, detention and punishment, and
prohibition of retrospective penal legislation … 5
14 Freedom of speech, assembly, association, occupation,
movement, & c. … … … 6
14A Right of access to information … … 7
15 Restrictions on fundamental rights … … 8
16 Existing written law and unwritten law to continue in force … 10
17 Remedy for the infringement of fundamental rights by executive
action … … … 10
vi The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
Article Page
CHAPTER - IV
LANGUAGE
18 Official language … … … 11
19 National languages … … … 11
20 Use of National Languages in Parliament, Provincial Councils
and Local Authorities … … … 11
21 Medium of instruction … … … 11
22 Languages of Administration … … 12
23 Language of Legislation … … 14
24 Languages of the courts … … … 15
25 Provision for adequate facilities for use of languages provided
for in this Chapter … … … 17
25A Provision of any law inconsistent with this Chapter deemed to
be repealed … … … 17
CHAPTER - V
CITIZENSHIP
26 Citizenship of Sri Lanka … … … 18
CHAPTER - VI
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY AND
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
27 Directive Principles of State Policy … … 19
28 Fundamental duties … … … 21
29 Principles of State Policy and fundamental duties not
justifiable … … … 22
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka vii
Article Page
CHAPTER - VII
THE EXECUTIVE
The President of the Republic
30 The President of the Republic … … 23
31 The election and the term of office of the President … 23
32 Assumption of office … … … 28
33 Powers and functions of the President … … 28
33A Repealed … … … …
34 Grant of Pardon … … … 30
35 Immunity of President from suit … … 31
36 Salary and Pension … … … 32
37 Exercise, performance and discharge of powers, duties and
functions of the President by the Prime Minister … 33
38 Vacation of office by President … … 34
39 Determination by the Supreme Court that the President was not
duly elected or the election of the President was void … 36
40 Vacation of office by President and election of succeeding
President … … … … 37
41 President’s staff … … … 38
CHAPTER - VII A
The Constitutional Council
41A Constitution of the Constitutional Council … 41
41B Council to recommend appointments … … 44
41C Council to approve appointments … … 45
41D Secretary-General and other officers of the Council … 46
41E Meetings of the Council … … … 47
41F Continuation in office of the members of the Council … 48
41G Powers and duties of the Council … … 48
viii The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
Article Page
41H Expenses to be charged on the Consolidated Fund … 48
41J Finality of decisions of the Council … … 49
CHAPTER - VIII
THE EXECUTIVE
The Cabinet of Ministers
42 President to be responsible to Parliament … … 50
43 Prime Minister and the Cabinet of Ministers … 50
44 Ministers and their subjects and functions… … 50
45 Ministers who are not members of the Cabinet of Ministers 51
46 Deputy Ministers … … … 52
47 Tenure of office of the Prime Minister, and the limitation of
numbers and tenure of office of Ministers and Deputy Ministers 53
48 Cabinet of Ministers after dissolution of Parliament … 54
49 Dissolution of the Cabinet of Ministers … … 55
50 Acting Ministers and Deputy Ministers … … 55
51 Secretary to the Prime Minister and Secretary to the Cabinet of
Ministers … … … … 56
52 Secretaries to Ministries … … … 56
53 Official oath or affirmation … … 57
CHAPTER - IX
THE EXECUTIVE
The Public Service
54 Public Service Commission … … … 58
55 Powers and functions of the Cabinet of Ministers and of the
Commission … … … 60
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka ix
Article Page
56 Committees of the Commission .... .... 61
57 Delegation of Powers to a public officer .... .... 61
58 Right of appeal .... .... .... 61
59 Administrative Appeals Tribunal .... .... 62
60 Commission not to exercise power where there is delegation 62
61 Procedure at meetings .... .... .... 62
61A Immunity from legal proceedings .... .... 63
61B Savings of rules and regulations in force .... .... 63
61C Interference with the Commission .... .... 63
61D Oath or affirmation of office .... .... 64
61E Appointments by the President .... .... 64
61F Interpretation .... .... .... 64
CHAPTER - X
THE LEGISLATURE
Parliament
62 Parliament .... .... .... 65
63 Official oath or affirmation .... .... 65
64 Speaker, Deputy Speaker and Deputy Chairman of Committees 65
65 Secretary-General of Parliament .... ... 66
66 Vacation of seats .... .... .... 67
67 Privileges, immunities and powers of Parliament and Members 68
68 Allowances of Members .... .... .... 68
69 Powers of Parliament to act notwithstanding vacancies .... 69
CHAPTER – XI
THE LEGISLATURE
Procedure and Powers
70 Sessions of Parliament .... .... .... 70
71 Adjournment .... .... .... 72
x The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
Article Page
72 Voting .... .... .... … 72
73 Quorum .... .... .... … 73
74 Standing Orders .... .... .... 73
75 Legislative power .... .... .... 73
76 Delegation of legislative power .... .... 74
77 Duties of Attorney-General in regard to published Bills .... 74
78 Publication of Bills and passing of Bills and resolutions .... 75
79 Certificate of Speaker .... .... .... 75
80 When Bill becomes law .... .... .... 76
81 Expulsion of Members and imposition of civic disability .... 77
CHAPTER - XII
THE LEGISLATURE
Amendment of the Constitution
82 Amendment or repeal of the Constitution must be expressed 79
83 Approval of certain Bills at a Referendum .... 80
84 Bills inconsistent with the Constitution .... .... 80
CHAPTER - XIII
THE REFERENDUM
85 Submission of Bills to people by Referendum .... 82
86 Submission of matters of national importance to people by
Referendum .... .... .... 82
87 Parliament to provide for procedure .... .... 83
CHAPTER - XIV
THE FRANCHISE AND ELECTIONS
88 Right to be an elector .... .... .... 84
89 Disqualification to be an elector .... ... 84
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka xi
Article Page
90 Qualification for election as a Member of Parliament ... 88
91 Disqualification for election as a Member of Parliament ... 88
92 Disqualification for election as President .... ... 92
93 Election to be free, equal and secret .... ... 93
94 Election of the President .... ... 93
95 Delimitation Commission .... ... 94
96 Electoral Districts .... ... ... 94
96A Repealed .... ... ...
97 Proclamation of names, & c. of Electoral Districts ... 95
98 Number of Members to be returned by the several Electoral
Districts and their apportionment among such Electoral Districts 96
99 Proportional Representation ... ... 98
99A Election of Members of Parliament on the basis of the total
number of votes polled at a General Election ... 102
100 Penalty for sitting and voting in Parliament when disqualified 103
101 Parliament may make provision in respect of elections .... 104
102 Public officer or an officer of a public corporation not to
function during period of election .... ... 105
CHAPTER - XIV A
ELECTION COMMISSION
103 Election Commission .... ... ... 106
104 Meetings of the Commission .... ... 107
104A Finality of decisions and immunity from suit .... 108
104B Powers, functions and duties of the Commission .... ... 109
104C Deployment of Police by the Commission .... 112
104D Deployment of Armed Forces .... ... 112
104E Commissioner-General of Elections and other officers of the
Commission .... .... .... 113
104F Returning Officers .... .... .... 114
xii The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
Article Page
104G Public Officers .... .... .... 115
104GG Failure to comply with directions to be an offence .... 115
104H Powers of Supreme Court to issue writs .... .... 116
104J Interpretation .... .... .... 116
CHAPTER - XV
THE JUDICIARY
105 Establishment of Courts, &c. .... .... 117
106 Public sittings .... .... .... 118
Independence of the Judiciary
107 Appointment and removal of Judges of the Supreme Court
and Court of Appeal .... .... 119
108 Salaries of the Judges of the Supreme Court and Court
of Appeal .... .... .... .... 120
109 Acting appointments .... .... .... 120
110 Performance or discharge of other duties or functions by Judges 121
111 Appointment, removal and disciplinary control of Judges of
the High Court .... .... .... 121
111A Commissioners of the High Court .... .... 122
111B Fiscal for the whole Island .... .... 123
111C Interference with Judiciary an offence .... .... 123
CHAPTER - XV A
JUDICIAL SERVICE COMMISSION
111D Constitution of the Judicial Service Comm ission … 124
111E Meetings of the Commission ... .... .... 124
111F Allowances of members of the Commission .... 125
111G Secretary to the Commission ... .... .... 125
111H Powers of the Commission .... .... .... 126
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka xiii
Article Page
111J Judicial officers and scheduled public officers may resign 126
111K Immunity from legal proceedings .... .... 127
111L Interference with the Commission an offence .... 127
111M Interpretation .... .... .... 127
112 Repealed .... .... .... ....
113 Repealed .... .... .... ....
113A Repealed .... .... .... ....
114 Repealed .... .... .... ....
115 Repealed .... .... .... ....
116 Renumbered as Article 111C .... ....
117 Repealed .... .... .... ....
CHAPTER - XVI
THE SUPERIOR COURTS
The Supreme Court
118 General jurisdiction of Supreme Court .... .... 130
119 Constitution of Supreme Court .... .... .... 130
120 Constitutional Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court .... 131
121 Ordinary exercise of constitutional jurisdiction in respect
of Bills .... .... .... .... 132
122 Special exercise of constitutional jurisdiction in respect of
urgent Bills .... .... .... 133
123 Determination of Supreme Court in respect of Bills .... 134
124 Validity of Bills and legislative process not to be questioned 135
125 Constitutional jurisdiction in the interpretation of the
Constitution .... .... .... 135
126 Fundamental rights jurisdiction and its exercise .... .... 136
127 Appellate jurisdiction .... .... ... 137
128 Right of appeal .... .... .... 137
129 Consultative jurisdiction .... .... 138
xiv The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
Article Page
130 Jurisdiction in election and referendum petitions .... 139
131 Jurisdiction in respect of breaches of Parliamentary
privileges .... .... .... 139
132 Sittings of the Supreme Court .... .... 140
133 Appointment of ad hoc Judges .... .... 140
134 Right to be heard by the Supreme Court .... .... 141
135 Registry of the Supreme Court and office of Registrar .... 141
136 Rules of the Supreme Court .... .... 141
The Court of Appeal
137 The Court of Appeal .... .... .... 144
138 Jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal.. .... .... 144
139 Powers in appeal .... .... .... 144
140 Power to issue writs, other than writs of habeas corpus .... 145
141 Power to issue writs of habeas corpus .... .... 145
142 Power to bring up and remove prisoners .... .... 146
143 Power to grant injunction .... .... 146
144 Parliamentary election petitions .... .... 147
145 Inspection of records .... .... .... 147
146 Sittings of the Court of Appeal .... .... 147
147 Registry of the Court of Appeal and office of Registrar .... 148
CHAPTER - XVII
FINANCE
148 Control of Parliament over public finance .... 149
149 Consolidated Fund .... .... .... 149
150 Withdrawal of sums from Consolidated Fund .... 149
151 Contingencies Fund .... .... .... 150
152 Special provisions as to Bills affecting public revenue ... .... 150
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka xv
Article Page
153 Auditor-General .... .... .... 151
153A Constitution of the Audit Service Commission .... 151
153B Meetings of the Commission .... .... 153
153C Powers and functions of the Commission .... 153
153D Influencing or attempting to influence decision of the Commission
or any officer of the Sri Lanka State Audit Service, to be
an offence .... .... ... 154
153E Immunity from legal proceedings .... .... 154
153F Costs and expenses .... .... .... 155
153G Appeals to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal .... 155
153H Commission to be answerable to Parliament .... 155
154 Duties and functions of Auditor-General .... 155
CHAPTER - XVII A
154A Establishment of Provincial Councils .... .... 159
154B Governor .... .... .... .... 159
154C Exercise of executive powers by the Governor .... 162
154D Membership of Provincial Council .. .... .... 162
154E Term of office .... .... .... 163
154F Board of Ministers .... .... .... 163
154G Statutes of Provincial Councils .... .... 165
154H Assent .... .... .... .... 168
154J Public Security .... .... .... 169
154K Failure to comply with directions .... .... 170
154L Failure of administrative machinery .... .... 170
154M Parliament to confer powers of Provincial Council to President 172
154N Financial instability .... .... .... 173
154P High Court .... .... .... 174
154Q Functions, powers, election, & c. of Provincial Councils .... 176
xvi The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
Article Page
154R Finance Commission .... .... .... 176
154S Special provision enabling Provincial Councils not to
exercise powers under this Chapter .... .... 178
154T Transitional measures .... .... .... 179
CHAPTER - XVIII
PUBLIC SECURITY
155 Public Security .... .... .... 180
CHAPTER - XVIII A
NATIONAL POLICE COMMISSION
155A Constitution of the National Police Commission .... 184
155B Meetings of the Commission .... .... 186
155C Immunity from legal proceedings .... .... 186
155D Secretary to the Commission .... .... 187
155E Costs and expenses .... .... .... 187
155F Interference with the Commission .... .... 187
155FF Powers of the Commission .... .... 187
155FFF Commission to make rules .... .... 187
155G Powers of the Commission .... .... 188
155H Delegation of certain powers of the Commission to a Committee 189
155J Delegation of certain functions by the Commission .... 189
155K Right of appeal .... .... .... 190
155L Appeals to Administrative Appeals Tribunal .... 191
155M Saving of existing rules and regulations .... .... 191
155N Commission answerable to Parliament .... .... 191
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka xvii
Article Page
CHAPTER - XIX
THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMISSIONER FOR
ADMINISTRATION
156 Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration .... 192
CHAPTER - XIX A
COMMISSION TO INVESTIGATE ALLEGATIONS OF
BRIBERY OR CORRUPTION
156A Commission to investigate bribery or corruption .... 194
CHAPTER - XIX B
NATIONAL PROCUREMENT COMMISSION
156B National Procurement Commission .... .... 195
156C Functions of the Commission .... .... 195
156D Powers of the Commission .... .... 197
156E Meetings of the Commission .... .... 198
156F Staff of the Commission .... .... .... 198
156G Expenses of the Commission to be charged on the Consolidated
Fund .... .... .... 199
156H Interpretation .... .... .... 199
CHAPTER - XX
GENERAL
157 International Treaties and Agreements .... .... 200
157A Prohibition against violation of territorial integrity of Sri Lanka 200
158 Delegation .... .... .... 205
159 Deputy Speaker to act for Speaker .... .... 205
xviii The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
Article Page
CHAPTER - XXI
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
160 First President .... .... .... 206
161 First Parliament .... .... .... 206
162 Application of certain provisions .... .... 215
163 Judges of Supreme Court and High Court to cease to hold office 215
164 Continuation in office of Judges, public officers and others 216
165 Oath or affirmation to be taken or made by public officers and
others .... .... .... .... 216
166 Powers, privileges, immunities and rights of the Republic 217
167 Rights, duties and obligations of the Republic .... 217
168 Past operation of laws, previous acts, offences and pending
action, & c. .... .... .... 218
169 Provisions relating to Judiciary .... .... 219
169A Provision relating to Queen's Counsel and Senior
Attorneys-at-Law .... .... .... 227
CHAPTER - XXII
INTERPRETATION
170 Interpretation .... .... .... 228
CHAPTER - XXIII
REPEAL
171 Repeal .... .... .... 232
CHAPTER - XXIV
PROMULGATION OF THE CONSTITUTION
172 Promulgation of the Constitution .... .... 233
Other Consequential Amendments in the Twenty First
Amendment to the Constitution .... .... 234
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka xix
Article Page
SCHEDULES
First Schedule .... .... .... 238
Second Schedule .... .... . ... 239
Third Schedule .... .... .... 241
Fourth Schedule .... .... .... 245
Fifth Schedule .... .... .... 246
Sixth Schedule .... .... .... 247
Seventh Schedule .... .... .... 248
Eighth Schedule .... .... .... 249
Ninth Schedule List I (Provincial Council list) 250
Appendix I .... .... 257
Appendix II .... .... 265
Appendix III .... .... 268
List II (Reserved list) .... .... 271
List III (Concurrent list) .... .... 279
xx The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka xxi
SVASTI
The PEOPLE OF SRI LANKA having, by their Mandate freely expressed
and granted on the sixth day of the waxing moon in the month of Adhi Nikini
in the year two thousand five hundred and twenty one of the Buddhist Era
(being Thursday the twenty-first day of the month of July in the year one
thousand nine hundred and seventy seven), entrusted to and empowered their
Representatives elected on that day to draft, adopt and operate a new
Republican Constitution in order to achieve the goals of a DEMOCRATIC
SOCIALIST REPUBLIC, and having solemnly resolved by the grant of such
Mandate and the confidence reposed in their said Representatives who were
elected by an overwhelming majority, to constitute SRI LANKA into a
DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC whilst ratifying the immutable
republican principles of REPRESENTATIVE DEMOCRACY and assuring
to all Peoples FREEDOM, EQUALITY, JUSTICE, FUNDAMENTAL
HUMAN RIGHTS and the INDEPENDENCE OF THE JUDICIARY as the
intangible heritage that guarantees the dignity and well-being of succeeding
generations of the People of SRI LANKA and of all the People of the World,
who come to share with those generations the effort of working for the
creation and preservation of a JUST AND FREE SOCIETY:
WE, THE FREELY ELECTED REPRESENTATIVES OF THE PEOPLE
OF SRI LANKA, in pursuance of such Mandate, humbly acknowledging our
obligations to our People and gratefully remembering their heroic and
unremitting struggle to regain and preserve their rights and privileges so that
the Dignity and Freedom of the Individual may be assured, Just, Social,
Economic and Cultural Order attained, the Unity of the Country restored, and
Concord established with other Nations,
do hereby adopt and enact
this
CONSTITUTION
as the
SUPREME LAW
of the
DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.
x xii The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
CHAPTER I
THE PEOPLE, THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY
1. Sri Lanka (Ceylon) is a Free, Sovereign, The State
Independent and Democratic Socialist Republic and shall
be known as the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri
Lanka.
2. The Republic of Sri Lanka is a Unitary State. Unitary State
3. In the Republic of Sri Lanka sovereignty is Sovereignty
in the People and is inalienable. Sovereignty includes the of the
People
powers of government, fundamental rights and the
franchise.
4. The Sovereignty of the People shall be exercised Exercise of
Sovereignty
and enjoyed in the following manner:–
(a) the legislative power of the People shall be
exercised by Parliament, consisting of elected
representatives of the People and by the
People at a Referendum;
(b) the executive power of the People, including
the defence of Sri Lanka, shall be exercised
by the President of the Republic elected by
the People;
(c) the judicial power of the People shall be
exercised by Parliament through courts, tribunals
and institutions created and established, or
recognized, by the Constitution, or created
and established by law, except in regard to
matters relating to the privileges, immunities
and powers of Parliament and of its Members,
wherein the judicial power of the People may be
exercised directly by Parliament according
to law;
(d) the fundamental rights which are by the
2 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
Constitution declared and recognized shall
be respected, secured and advanced by all the
organs of government and shall not be abridged,
restricted or denied, save in the manner and
to the extent hereinafter provided; and
(e) the franchise shall be exercisable at the
election of the President of the Republic
and of the Members of Parliament and at
every Referendum by every citizen who has
attained the age of eighteen years and who,
being qualified to be an elector as hereinafter
provided, has his name entered in the register
of electors.
5. The territory of the Republic of Sri Lanka shall
Territory of
the Republic consist of the 1[twenty-five] administrative districts, the
names of which are set out in the First Schedule and its
2[territorial waters:
Provided that such administrative districts may be
subdivided or amalgamated so as to constitute different
administrative districts, as Parliament may by resolution
determine]
The National 6. The National Flag of the Republic of Sri Lanka
Flag shall be the Lion Flag depicted in the Second Schedule.
The National 7. The National Anthem of the Republic of Sri
Anthem
Lanka shall be “Sri Lanka Matha”, the words and music
of which are set out in the Third Schedule.
The National 8. The National Day of the Republic of Sri Lanka
Day shall be the fourth day of February
1 - Substituted by the Seventh Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 2(a).
2 - Substituted by the Seventh Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 2(b).
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 3
CHAPTER II
BUDDHISM
9. The Republic of Sri Lanka shall give to Buddhism Buddhism
the foremost place and accordingly it shall be the duty of
the State to protect and foster the Buddha Sasana, while
assuring to all religions the rights granted by Articles 10
and 14(1)(e).
4 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
CHAPTER III
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
Freedom of 10. Every person is entitled to freedom of thought,
thought,
conscience and religion, including the freedom to have or
conscience
and religion to adopt a religion or belief of his choice.
Freedom 11. No person shall be subjected to torture or to
from torture
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Right to 12. (1) All persons are equal before the law and are
equality
entitled to the equal protection of the law.
(2) No citizen shall be discriminated against on the
grounds of race, religion, language, caste, sex, political
opinion, place of birth or any one of such grounds:
Provided that it shall be lawful to require
a person to acquire within a reasonable time sufficient
knowledge of any language as a qualification for any
employment or office in the Public, Judicial or Local
Government Service or in the service of any Public
Corporation, where such knowledge is reasonably necessary
for the discharge of the duties of such employment or office:
Provided further that it shall be lawful to require
a person to have a sufficient knowledge of any language
as a qualification for any such employment or office where no
function of that employment or office can be discharged
otherwise than with a knowledge of that language.
(3) No person shall, on the grounds of race, religion,
language, caste, sex or any one of such grounds, be
subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition
with regard to access to shops, public restaurants, hotels,
places of public entertainment and places of public
worship of his own religion.
(4) Nothing in this Article shall prevent special
provision being made, by law, subordinate legislation or
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 5
executive action, for the advancement of women, children
or disabled persons.
13. (1) No person shall be arrested except according Freedom from
to procedure established by law. Any person arrested shall arbitrary
arrest,
be informed of the reason for his arrest.
detention and
punishment,
(2) Every person held in custody, detained or and prohibition
of retrospective
otherwise deprived of personal liberty shall be brought
penal
before the judge of the nearest competent court according legislation
to procedure established by law and shall not be further
held in custody, detained or deprived of personal liberty
except upon and in terms of the order of such judge made
in accordance with procedure established by law.
(3) Any person charged with an offence shall be
entitled to be heard, in person or by an Attorney-at-Law,
at a fair trial by a competent court.
(4) No person shall be punished with death or
imprisonment except by order of a competent court, made
in accordance with procedure established by law. The
arrest, holding in custody, detention or other deprivation
of personal liberty of a person, pending investigation or
trial, shall not constitute punishment.
(5) Every person shall be presumed innocent until he
is proved guilty:
Provided that the burden of proving particular
facts may, by law, be placed on an accused person.
(6) No person shall be held guilty of an offence on
account of any act or omission which did not, at the
time of such act or omission, constitute such an offence
and no penalty shall be imposed for any offence more
severe than the penalty in force at the time such offence
was committed.
Nothing in this Article shall prejudice the trial
6 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
and punishment of any person for any act or omission
which, at the time when it was committed, was criminal
according to the general principles of law recognized
by the community of nations.
It shall not be contravention of this Article to
require the imposition of a minimum penalty for an
offence provided that such penalty does not exceed the
maximum penalty prescribed for such offence at the time
such offence was committed.
(7) The arrest, holding in custody, detention or
other deprivation of personal liberty of a person, by
reason of a removal order or a deportation order made
under the provisions of the Immigrants and Emigrants Act
or the Indo-Ceylon Agreement (Implementation) Act, No.
14 of 1967, or such other law as may be enacted in
substitution therefor, shall not be a contravention of this
Article.
Freedom of 14. (1) Every citizen is entitled to –
speech,
assembly, (a) the freedom of speech and expression
association,
including publication;
occupation,
movement, & c.
(b) the freedom of peaceful assembly;
(c) the freedom of association;
(d) the freedom to form and join a trade
union;
(e) the freedom, either by himself or in
association with others, and either in public
or in private, to manifest his religion or
belief in worship, observance, practice and
teaching;
(f) the freedom by himself or in association
with others to enjoy and promote his own
culture and to use his own language;
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 7
(g) the freedom to engage by himself or
in association with others in any lawful
occupation, profession, trade, business or
enterprise;
(h) the freedom of movement and of choosing
his residence within Sri Lanka; and
(i) the freedom to return to Sri Lanka.
(2) A person who, not being a citizen of any other
country, has been permanently and legally resident in Sri
Lanka immediately prior to the commencement of the
Constitution and continues to be so resident shall be
entitled, for a period of ten years from the commencement
of the Constitution, to the rights declared and recognized
by paragraph (1) of this Article.
3[14A. (1) Every citizen shall have the right of Right of
access to
access to any information as provided for by law, being
information
information that is required for the exercise or protection
of a citizen’s right held by:-
(a) the State, a Ministry or any Government
Department or any statutory body established
or created by or under any law;
(b) any Ministry of a Minister of the Board of
Ministers of a Province or any Department
or any statutory body established or created
by a statute of a Provincial Council;
(c) any local authority; and
(d) any other person, who is in possession of
such information relating to any institution
referred to in sub-paragraphs (a), (b) or (c) of
this paragraph.
3 - Inserted by the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 2.
8 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
(2) No restrictions shall be placed on the right
declared and recognized by this Article, other than such
restrictions prescribed by law as are necessary in a
democratic society, in the interests of national security,
territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention
of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals
and of the reputation or the rights of others, privacy,
prevention of contempt of court, protection of parliamentary
privilege, for preventing the disclosure of information
communicated in confidence, or for maintaining the
authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
(3) In this Article, “citizen” includes a body whether
incorporated or unincorporated, if not less than three-fourths
of the members of such body are citizens.]
Restrictions on 15. (1) The exercise and operation of the
fundamental
fundamental rights declared and recognized by Articles
rights
13(5) and 13(6) shall be subject only to such restrictions
as may be prescribed by law in the interests of national
security. For the purposes of this paragraph “law” includes
regulations made under the law for the time being
relating to public security.
(2) The exercise and operation of the fundamental
right declared and recognized by Article 14(1)(a) shall
be subject to such restrictions as may be prescribed by
law in the interests of racial and religious harmony or in
relation to parliamentary privilege, contempt of court,
defamation or incitement to an offence.
(3) The exercise and operation of the fundamental
right declared and recognized by Article 14(1)(b) shall
be subject to such restrictions as may be prescribed by
law in the interests of racial and religious harmony.
(4) The exercise and operation of the fundamental
right declared and recognized by Article 14(1)(c) shall
be subject to such restrictions as may be prescribed by
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 9
law in the interests of racial and religious harmony or
national economy.
(5) The exercise and operation of the fundamental
right declared and recognized by Article 14(1)(g) shall
be subject to such restrictions as may be prescribed by
law in the interests of national economy or in relation to –
(a) the professional, technical, academic, financial
and other qualifications necessary for practising
any profession or carrying on any occupation,
trade, business or enterprise and the licensing
and disciplinary control of the person entitled
to such fundamental right; and
(b) the carrying on by the State, a State agency
or a public corporation of any trade, business,
industry, service or enterprise whether to the
exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens or
otherwise.
(6) The exercise and operation of the fundamental
right declared and recognized by Article 14(1)(h) shall
be subject to such restrictions as may be prescribed by
law in the interests of national economy.
(7) The exercise and operation of all the fundamental
rights declared and recognized by Articles 12, 13(1), 13(2)
and 14 shall be subject to such restrictions as may be
prescribed by law in the interests of national security,
public order and the protection of public health or morality,
or for the purpose of securing due recognition and respect
for the rights and freedoms of others, or of meeting the
just requirements of the general welfare of a democratic
society. For the purposes of this paragraph “law” includes
regulations made under the law for the time being relating
to public security.
(8) The exercise and operation of the fundamental
rights declared and recognized by Articles 12(1), 13 and 14
10 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
shall, in their application to the members of the Armed
Forces, Police Force and other Forces charged with
the maintenance of public order, be subject to such
restrictions as may be prescribed by law in the interests of
the proper discharge of their duties and the maintenance
of discipline among them.
Existing 16. (1) All existing written law and unwritten
written law law shall be valid and operative notwithstanding any
and
inconsistency with the preceding provisions of this
unwritten
law to Chapter.
continue in
force
(2) The subjection of any person on the order of
a competent court to any form of punishment recognized
by any existing written law shall not be a contravention of
the provisions of this Chapter.
Remedy 17. Every person shall be entitled to apply to the
for the Supreme Court, as provided by Article 126, in respect of
infringement of
the infringement or imminent infringement, by executive
fundamental
rights by or administrative action, of a fundamental right to which
executive
such person is entitled under the provisions of this
action
Chapter.
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 11
CHAPTER IV
LANGUAGE
18. 4[(1)]The Official Language of Sri Lanka shall Official
Language
be Sinhala.
5[(2) Tamil shall also be an official language.
(3) English shall be the link language.
(4) Parliament shall by law provide for the
implementation of the provisions of this Chapter.]
19. The National Languages of Sri Lanka shall be National
Languages
Sinhala and Tamil.
20. A Member of Parliament or 6[a member of a
Use of
Provincial Council or a Local Authority] shall be entitled National
Languages in
to perform his duties and discharge his functions in Parliament
Parliament,
7[or in such Provincial Council or Local Authority] in Provincial
Councils and
either of the National Languages.
Local
Authorities
21. (1) A person shall be entitled to be educated Medium of
through the medium of either of the National Languages: instruction
Provided that the provisions of this paragraph
shall not apply to an institution of higher education where
the medium of instruction is a language other than a
National Language.
(2) Where one National Language is a medium
of instruction for or in any course, department or faculty
of any University directly or indirectly financed by the
State, the other National Language shall also be made a
medium of instruction for or in such course, department or
faculty for students who prior to their admission to such
4 - Renumbered as paragraph (1) by the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution
Sec. 2(a).
5 - Inserted by the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 2(b).
6 - Substituted by the Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 2(1).
7 - Substituted by the Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution Section. 2(2).
12 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
University, were educated through the medium of such
other National Language:
Provided that compliance with the preceding
provisions of this paragraph shall not be obligatory if such
other National Language is the medium of instruction
for or in any like course, department or faculty either at
any other campus or branch of such University or of any
other like University.
(3) In this Article “University” includes any
institution of higher education.
22. (1) Sinhala and Tamil shall be the languages
8[Languages of
Administration of administration throughout Sri Lanka and Sinhala shall
be the language of administration and be used for the
maintenance of public records and the transaction of all
business by public institutions of all the Provinces of Sri
Lanka other than the Northern and Eastern Provinces
where Tamil shall be so used:
Provided that the President may, having regard
to the proportion which the Sinhala or Tamil linguistic
minority population in any unit comprising a division
of an Assistant Government Agent, bears to the total
population of that area, direct that both Sinhala and Tamil
or a language other than the language used as the language
of administration in the province in which such area may
be situated, be used as the language of administration for
such area.
(2) In any area where Sinhala is used as the language
of administration a person other than an official acting in
his official capacity, shall be entitled:
(a) to receive communications from and to
communicate and transact business with,
any official in his official capacity, in
either Tamil or English;
8 - Substituted by the Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 3.
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 13
(b) If the law recognizes his right to inspect
or to obtain copies of or extracts from any
official register, record, publication or other
document, to obtain a copy of, or an extract
from such register, record, publication or
other document, or a translation thereof,
as the case may be, in either Tamil or
English;
(c) where a document is executed by any
official for the purpose of being issued
to him, to obtain such document or a
translation thereof, in either Tamil or
English;
(3) In any area where Tamil is used as the language
of administration, a person other than an official acting
in his official capacity, shall be entitled to exercise
the rights and to obtain the services, referred to in
sub-paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of paragraph (2) of this
Article, in Sinhala or English.
(4) A Provincial Council or a Local Authority
which conducts its business in Sinhala shall be entitled
to receive communications from and to communicate and
transact business with, any official in his official capacity,
in Sinhala and a Provincial Council or a Local Authority
which conducts its business in Tamil shall be entitled to receive
communications from and to communicate and transact
business with, any official in his official capacity, in Tamil:
Provided however that a Provincial Council, Local
Authority, Public Institution or any official receiving
communications from transacting business with any other
or Provincial Council, Local Authority, Public Institution
or an official functioning in an area in which a different
language is used as the Language of administration shall be
entitled to receive communications from and to communicate
and transact business in English.
14 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
(5) A person shall be entitled to be examined through
the medium of either Sinhala or Tamil or a language of his
choice at any examination for the admission of persons to
the Public Service, Judicial Service, Provincial Public
Service, Local Government Service or any public institution,
subject to the condition that he may be required to acquire
a sufficient knowledge of Tamil or Sinhala, as the case
may be, within a reasonable time after admission to such
service or public institution where such knowledge is
reasonably necessary for the discharge of his duties:
Provided that a person may be required to have a
sufficient knowledge of Sinhala or Tamil, as a condition
for admission to any such service or public institution
where no function of the office or employment for which
he is recruited can be discharged otherwise than with a
sufficient knowledge of such language.
(6) In this Article –
“official” means the President, any Minister, Deputy
Minister, Governor, Chief Minister or Minister of the Board
of Ministers of a Province, or any officer of a public
institution; local authority or Provincial Council; and
“Public Institution” means a department or institution
of the Government, a public corporation or statutory
institution.]
9[Language
23. (1) All laws and subordinate legislation shall
of Legislation
be enacted or made and published in Sinhala and Tamil,
together with a translation thereof in English:
Provided that Parliament shall, at the stage of
enactment of any law determine which text shall prevail in
the event of any inconsistency between texts:
Provided further that in respect of all other
written laws and the text in which such written laws was
9 - Substituted by the Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 3.
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 15
enacted or adopted or made, shall prevail in the event of
any inconsistency between such texts.
(2) All Orders, Proclamations, Rules, By-laws,
Regulations and Notifications made or issued under any
written law other than those made or issued by a
Provincial Council or a Local Authority and the Gazette
shall be published in Sinhala and Tamil together with a
translation thereof in English.
(3) All Orders, Proclamations, Rules, By-laws,
Regulations and Notifications made or issued under any
written law by any Provincial Council or Local Authority
and all documents, including circulars and forms issued
by such body or any public institution shall be published
in the language used in the administration in the respective
areas in which they function, together with a translation
thereof in English.
(4) All laws and subordinate legislation in force
immediately prior to the commencement of the Constitution,
shall be published in the Gazette in the Sinhala and Tamil
Language as expeditiously as possible.]
24. 10[(1) Sinhala and Tamil shall be the languages Languages
of the courts
of the Courts throughout Sri Lanka and Sinhala shall be
used as the language of the courts situated in all the areas
of Sri Lanka except those in any area where Tamil is the
language of administration. The record and proceedings
shall be in the language of the Court. In the event of an
appeal from any court records shall also be prepared in the
language of the court hearing the appeal, if the language
of such court is other than the language used by the court
from which the appeal is preferred:
Provided that the Minister in charge of the
subject of Justice may, with the concurrence of the
Cabinet of Ministers direct that the record of any court
10 - Substituted by the Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 4(1).
16 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
shall also be maintained and the proceedings conducted in
a language other than the language of the court.]
(2) Any party or applicant or any person legally
entitled to represent such party or applicant may initiate
proceedings and submit to court pleadings and other
documents and participate in the proceedings in courts,
11[in either Sinhala or Tamil.]
(3) Any judge, juror, party or applicant or any
person legally entitled to represent such party or applicant,
who is not conversant with the language used in a court,
shall be entitled to interpretation and to translation into
12[Sinhala or Tamil] provided by the State, to enable him
to understand and participate in the proceedings before
such court and shall also be entitled to obtain in 13[such
language] any such part of the record or a translation
thereof, as the case may be, as he may be entitled to
obtain according to law.
(4) The Minister in charge of the subject of Justice
may, with the concurrence of the Cabinet of Ministers,
issue, directions permitting 14[the use of English] in or in
relation to the records and proceedings in any court for all
purposes or for such purposes as may be specified therein.
Every judge shall be bound to implement such directions.
(5) In this Article –
“Court” means any court or tribunal created and
established for the administration of justice including the
adjudication and settlement of industrial and other
disputes, or any other tribunal or institution exercising
judicial or quasi-judicial functions or any tribunal or
institution created and established for the conciliation and
settlement of disputes;
11 - Substituted by the Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 4(2).
12 - Substituted by the Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 4(3)(a).
13 - Substituted by the Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 4(3)(b).
14 - Substituted by the Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 4(4).
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 17
“judge” includes the President, Chairman, Presiding
Officer and member of any court; and
“record” includes Pleadings, Judgments, Orders and
Other judicial and Ministerial acts.
25. The State shall provide adequate facilities for the Provision for
use of the languages provided for in this Chapter. adequate
facilities for
use of
languages
provided for
in this
Chapter
15[25A. In the event of any inconsistency between the Provision of
provisions of any law and the provisions of this Chapter, any law
inconsistent
the provisions of this Chapter shall prevail.]
with this
Chapter
deemed to be
repealed
15 - Inserted by the Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 5.
18 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
CHAPTER V
CITIZENSHIP
Citizenship 26. (1) There shall be one status of citizenship
of Sri Lanka
known as “the status of a citizen of Sri Lanka”.
(2) A citizen of Sri Lanka shall for all purposes
be described only as a “citizen of Sri Lanka”, whether
such person became entitled to citizenship by descent
or by virtue of registration in accordance with the law
relating to citizenship.
(3) No distinction shall be drawn between citizens
of Sri Lanka for any purpose by reference to the mode of
acquisition of such status, as to whether acquired by
descent or by virtue of registration.
(4) No citizen of Sri Lanka shall be deprived of
his status of a citizen of Sri Lanka, except under and by
virtue of the provisions of sections 19, 20, 21 and 22 of
the Citizenship Act:
Provided that the provisions of sections 23 and
24 of that Act shall also be applicable to a person who
became entitled to the status of a citizen of Sri Lanka by
virtue of registration under the provisions of section 11,
12 or 13 of that Act.
(5) Every person who immediately prior to the
commencement of the Constitution was a citizen of Sri
Lanka, whether by descent or by virtue of registration in
accordance with any law relating to citizenship, shall be
entitled to the status and to the rights of a citizen of Sri
Lanka as provided in the preceding provisions of this
Article.
(6) The provisions of all existing written laws
relating to citizenship and all other existing written laws
wherein reference is made to citizenship shall be read
subject to the preceding provisions of this Article.
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 19
CHAPTER VI
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY AND
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
27. (1) The Directive Principles of State Policy Directive
Principles
herein contained shall guide Parliament, the President
of State
and the Cabinet of Ministers in the enactment of laws and Policy
the governance of Sri Lanka for the establishment of a just
and free society.
(2) The State is pledged to establish in Sri Lanka
a Democratic Socialist Society, the objectives of which
include –
(a) the full realization of the fundamental rights
and freedoms of all persons;
(b) the promotion of the welfare of the People
by securing and protecting as effectively as it
may, a social order in which justice (social,
economic and political) shall guide all the
institutions of the national life;
(c) the realization by all citizens of an adequate
standard of living for themselves and their
families, including adequate food, clothing and
housing, the continuous improvement of living
conditions and the full enjoyment of leisure
and social and cultural opportunities;
(d) the rapid development of the whole country
by means of public and private economic
activity and by laws prescribing such planning
and controls as may be expedient for directing
and Co-ordinating such public and private
economic activity towards social objectives
and the public weal;
(e) the equitable distribution among all citizens
of the material resources of the community
20 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
and the social product, so as best to subserve
the common good;
(f) the establishment of a just social order in
which the means of production, distribution
and exchange are not concentrated and
centralised in the State, State agencies or in
the hands of a privileged few, but are dispersed
among and owned by, all the People of Sri
Lanka;
(g) raising the moral and cultural standards of
the People and ensuring the full development
of human personality; and
(h) the complete eradication of illiteracy and the
assurance to all persons of the right to universal
and equal access to education at all levels.
(3) The State shall safeguard the independence,
sovereignty, unity and the territorial integrity of Sri Lanka.
(4) The State shall strengthen and broaden the
democratic structure of government and the democratic
rights of the People by decentralizing the administration
and by affording all possible opportunities to the People to
participate at every level in national life and in government.
(5) The State shall strengthen national unity by
promoting co-operation and mutual confidence among all
sections of the People of Sri Lanka, including the racial,
religious, linguistic and other groups and shall take effective
steps in the fields of teaching, education and information
in order to eliminate discrimination and prejudice.
(6) The State shall ensure equality of opportunity to
citizens, so that no citizen shall suffer any disability on
the ground of race, religion, language, caste, sex, political
opinion or occupation.
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 21
(7) The State shall eliminate economic and social
privilege and disparity and the exploitation of man by man
or by the State.
(8) The State shall ensure that the operation of the
economic system does not result in the concentration of
wealth and the means of production to the common
detriment.
(9) The State shall ensure social security and welfare.
(10) The State shall assist the development of the
cultures and the languages of the People.
(11) The State shall create the necessary economic
and social environment to enable people of all religious
faiths to make a reality of their religious principles.
(12) The State shall recognize and protect the family
as the basic unit of society.
(13) The State shall promote with special care the
interests of children and youth, so as to ensure their full
development, physical, mental, moral, religious and social,
and to protect them from exploitation and discrimination.
(14) The State shall protect, preserve and improve
the environment for the benefit of the community.
(15) The State shall promote international peace,
security and co-operation, and the establishment of a just
and equitable international economic and social order and
shall endeavour to foster respect for international law and
treaty obligations in dealings among nations.
28. The exercise and enjoyment of rights and Fundamental
freedoms are inseparable from the performance of duties duties
and obligations and accordingly it is the duty of every
person in Sri Lanka –
(a) to uphold and defend the Constitution and
the law;
22 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
(b) to further the national interest and to foster
national unity;
(c) to work conscientiously in his chosen
occupation;
(d) to preserve and protect public property and
to combat misuse and waste of public
property;
(e) to respect the rights and freedoms of others;
and
(f) to protect nature and conserve its riches.
29. The provisions of this Chapter do not confer or
Principles
of State impose legal rights or obligations and are not enforceable
Policy and
in any court or tribunal. No question of inconsistency
fundamental
duties not with such provisions shall be raised in any court or
justifiable
tribunal.
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 23
CHAPTER VII
THE EXECUTIVE
The President of the Republic
16[30. (1) There shall be a President of the The
Republic of Sri Lanka, who is the Head of the State, President
of the
the Head of the Executive and of the Government,
Republic
and the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces.
(2) The President of the Republic shall be
elected by the People, and shall hold office for a term
of five years.]
31. (1) Any citizen who is qualified to be The election
and the
elected to the office of President may be nominated as
term of
a candidate for such office – office of the
President
(a) by a recognized political party; or
(b) if he is or has been an elected member of
the legislature, by any other political party
or by an elector whose name has been
entered in any register of electors.
17[(2) No person who has been twice elected to
the office of President by the People, shall be qualified
thereafter to be elected to such office by the People.]
(3) The poll for the election of the President shall
be taken not less than one month and not more than two
months before the expiration of the term of office of the
President in office.
18[(3A) (a) (i) Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in the preceding provisions of this Chapter, the
President may, 19[at any time after the expiration of four
16 - Substituted by the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 3.
17 - Inserted by the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 4(1).
18 - Inserted by the Third Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 2(1).
19 - Substituted by the Eighteenth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 2(2)(a).
24 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
years from the 20[commencement of his first term of office,]
by Proclamation, declare his intention] of appealing to the
People for a mandate to hold office, 21[by election, for a
second term.]
22[Repealed]
(ii) Upon the making of a Proclamation under
sub-paragraph (i) the Commissioner of Elections shall be
required to take a poll for the election of the President.
(b) If, at any time after the date of Proclamation
referred to in paragraph (a), and before the close of the
poll at the election held in pursuance of such Proclamation,
the President in office dies, such Proclamation shall be
deemed to have been revoked with effect from the date
of such death and the election to be held in pursuance of
such Proclamation shall be deemed to be cancelled. The
vacancy in the office of the President caused by such
death shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of
Article 40.
(c) (i) If, at any time between the close of the poll at
an election held under this paragraph and the declaration
of the result of such election, a candidate at such election
dies, the Commissioner of Elections shall proceed with the
count and declare the result of such election,
notwithstanding the death of such candidate.
(ii) If the person entitled to be declared elected as
President is dead at the time of the declaration of the result
of such election, the Commissioner of Elections shall not
declare the result of such election but shall take a fresh
poll for the election of the President.
(iii) If by reason of the death referred to in
sub-paragraph (i) there is a vacancy in the office of President,
20 - Substituted by the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 4(2)(a)(i).
21 - Substituted by the Twentieth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 2.
22 - Repealed by the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 4(2)(a)(ii).
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 25
the Prime Minister shall act in the office of President
during the period between the occurrence of such vacancy
and the assumption of office by the new President and
shall appoint one of the other Ministers of the Cabinet to
act in the office of Prime Minister:
Provided that if the office of Prime Minister be
then vacant or the Prime Minister is unable to act, the
Speaker shall act in the office of President.
(d) The person declared elected as President at an
election held under this paragraph shall, if such person –
(i) is the President in office, hold office 23[for a
term of five years] commencing on such date
in the year in which that election is held
(being a date after such election) or in the
succeeding year, as corresponds to the date
on which his first term of office commenced,
whichever date is earlier; or
(ii) is not the President in office, hold office,
24[for a term of five years] commencing on
the date on which the result of such election
is declared.
(e) A person succeeding to the office of President
under the provisions of Article 40 shall not be entitled
to exercise the right conferred on a President by
sub-paragraph (a) of this paragraph.
(f) For the purposes of this paragraph, the first
term of office of the first President referred to in
Article 160 shall be deemed to have commenced on
February 4, 1978.]
25[(4) Where a poll for the election of a President is
taken, the term of office of the person elected as President
23 - Substituted by the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 4(2)(b).
24 - Substituted by the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 4(2)(b).
25 - Substituted by the Third Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 2(2).
26 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
at such election shall commence on the expiration of the
term of office of the President in office:
Provided that notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in Article 40 –
(a) if any person declared elected as President at
a poll for the election of a President dies at
any time after his being declared elected as
President and before the date on which his
term of office would, but for his death, have
commenced, the Commissioner of Elections,
shall take a fresh poll for the election of a
President. If the date fixed for such fresh poll
is a date later than such first-mentioned date,
the term of office of the person declared
elected at such poll shall, notwithstanding the
preceding provisions of this Article, be
deemed to have commenced on such first-
mentioned date. For the purposes only of
Article 38(1)(d), the date of commencement
of the term of office of the new President
shall be the date of his election;
(b) where the President in office is not a
candidate or is not re-elected, at a poll for the
election of a President, his term of office
shall be deemed to have expired on the date
on which the result of such election is
declared. The person elected as President at
such election shall assume office forthwith,
but not later than two weeks from such date:
Provided that the President in office,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
Article 30, shall continue to exercise, perform
and discharge the powers, duties and functions
of the office of President until the assumption
of office by the person declared elected as
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 27
President. If the office of President becomes
vacant, by reason of the person declared
elected as President failing to assume office,
the President in office shall continue to exercise,
perform and discharge the powers, duties and
functions of the office of President, until the
Prime Minister or if the office of Prime Minister
be then vacant or if the Prime Minister be
unable to act, the Speaker commences to act in
the office of President in terms of Article 40;
(c) if by reason of the death referred to in
sub-paragraph (a) there is a vacancy in the
office of President, the Prime Minister shall
act in the office of President during the period
between the occurrence of such vacancy and
the assumption of office by the new President
and shall appoint one of the other Ministers
of the Cabinet to act as Prime Minister:
Provided that if the office of Prime
Minister be then vacant or the Prime Minister
is unable to act, the Speaker shall act in the
office of President.]
(5) The election of the President shall be conducted
by the Commissioner of Elections who shall fix the date
for the nomination of candidates for such election and the
date on which the poll shall be taken.
(6) Parliament shall by law make provision for –
(a) the nomination of candidates for the
election of President;
(b) the register of electors to be used at and
the procedure for the election of the
President;
(c) the creation of offences relating to such
election and the punishment therefor;
28 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
(d) he grounds and manner of avoiding such
election and of determining any disputed
election; and
(e) all other matters necessary or incidental
thereto.
32. (1) The person elected or succeeding to the
Assumption
of office office of President shall assume office upon taking and
subscribing the oath or making and subscribing the
affirmation, set out in the Fourth Schedule, in Sri Lanka
before the Chief Justice or any other Judge of the
Supreme Court.
(2) Upon such assumption of office the President
shall cease to hold any other office created or recognized
by the Constitution and if he is a Member of Parliament,
shall vacate his seat in Parliament. The President shall not
hold any other office or place of profit whatsoever.
26[(3) The President shall, by virtue of his office
attend Parliament once in every three months. In the
discharge of this function the President shall be entitled to
all the privileges, immunities and powers of a Member of
Parliament, other than the entitlement to vote, and shall
not be liable for any breach of the privileges of Parliament
or of its members.]
27[(4) The President shall by virtue of his office, also
have the right to address and send messages to
Parliament.]
28[Powers 33. In addition to the powers and functions expressly
and conferred on or assigned to him by the Constitution or by
functions
any written law, the President shall have the power -
of the
President
26 - Substituted by the Eighteenth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 3(1).
27 - Inserted by the Eighteenth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 3(2).
28 - Substituted by the Twentieth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 3.
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 29
(a) to make the Statement of Government Policy
in Parliament at the commencement of each
session of Parliament;
(b) to preside at ceremonial sittings of Parliament;
(c) to ensure the creation of proper conditions for
the conduct of free and fair elections, at the
request of the Election Commission;
(d) to receive and recognize and to appoint and
accredit Ambassadors, High Commissioners,
Plenipotentiaries and other diplomatic agents;
(e) to appoint as President’s Counsel,
Attorneys-at-Law who have reached eminence
in the profession and have maintained high
standards of conduct and professional
rectitude. Every President’s Counsel appointed
under this paragraph shall be entitled to all
such privileges as were hitherto enjoyed by a
Queen’s Counsel;
(f) to keep the Public Seal of the Republic, and
to make and execute under the Public Seal
the acts of appointment of the Prime Minister
and other Ministers of the Cabinet of
Ministers, the Chief Justice and other Judges
of the Supreme Court, the President and other
Judges of the Court of Appeal and such grants
and dispositions of lands and immovable
property vested in the Republic as he is by
law required or empowered to do, and to use
the Public Seal for sealing all things
whatsoever that shall pass that Seal;
(g) to declare war and peace; and
(h) to do all such acts and things, not being
inconsistent with the provisions of the
30 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
Constitution or written law, as by international
law, custom or usage he is required or
authorized to do.]
29[33A. Repealed]
Grant of 34. (1) The President may in the case of any
Pardon offender convicted of any offence in any court within the
Republic of Sri Lanka –
(a) grant a pardon, either free or subject to
lawful conditions;
(b) grant any respite, either indefinite for such
period as the President may think fit, of the
execution of any sentence passed on such
offender;
(c) substitute a less severe form of punishment
for any punishment imposed on such
offender; or
(d) remit the whole or any part of any
punishment imposed or of any penalty or
forfeiture otherwise due to the Republic on
account of such offence:
Provided that where any offender shall have
been condemned to suffer death by the sentence of any
court, the President shall cause a report to be made to him
by the Judge who tried the case and shall forward such
report to the Attorney-General with instructions that after
the Attorney-General has advised thereon, the report shall
be sent together with the Attorney-General’s advice to the
Minister in charge of the subject of Justice, who shall
forward the report with his recommendation to the
President.
29 - Repealed by the Twentieth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 4.
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 31
(2) The President may in the case of any person
who is or has become subject to any disqualification
specified in paragraph (d), (e), (f), (g) or (h) of Article 89
or sub-paragraph (g) of Paragraph (1) of Article 91 -
(a) grant a pardon, either free or subject to
lawful conditions; or
(b) reduce the period of such disqualification.
(3) When any offence has been committed for
which the offender may be tried within the Republic of
Sri Lanka, the President may grant a pardon to any
accomplice in such offence who shall give such
information as shall lead to the conviction of the principal
offender or of any one of such principal offenders, if
more than one.
30[35. (1) While any person holds office as President, Immunity of
President
no proceedings shall be instituted or continued against
from suit
him in any court or tribunal in respect of anything done or
omitted to be done by him either in his official or private
capacity:
Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall be
read and construed as restricting the right of any person to
make an application under Article 126 against the
Attorney-General, in respect of anything done or omitted
to be done by the President, in his official capacity:
Provided further that the Supreme Court shall
have no jurisdiction to pronounce upon the exercise of the
powers of the President under paragraph (g) of Article 33.
(2) Where provision is made by law limiting the
time within which proceedings of any description may be
brought against any person, the period of time during
which such person holds the office of President shall not
30 - Substituted by the Twentieth Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 5.
32 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
be taken into account in calculating the period of time
prescribed by that law.
(3) The immunity conferred by the provisions of
paragraph (1) of this Article shall not apply to any
proceedings in any court in relation to the exercise of any
power pertaining to any subject or function assigned to the
President or remaining in his charge under paragraph (2)
of Article 44 or to proceedings in the Supreme Court
under paragraph (2) of Article 129 or to proceedings in
the Supreme Court under Article 130(a) relating to the
election of the President or the validity of a referendum or
to proceedings in the Court of Appeal under Article 144
or in the Supreme Court, relating to the election of a
Member of Parliament:
Provided that any such proceedings in relation
to the exercise of any power pertaining to any such
subject or function shall be instituted against the
Attorney-General.]
Salary and 36. (1) Within one month of the commencement of
Pension
the Constitution, Parliament shall by resolution determine
the salary, allowances and pension entitlement of the
holders of the office of President. Such pension shall be in
addition to any other pension to which such person is
entitled by virtue of any prior service.
(2) Upon the assumption of the office of President
the holder of such office shall become entitled to the
receipt of such salary and allowances and thereafter, of
such pension as may be determined by Parliament. Any
subsequent amendment, repeal or replacement of this
Article and any subsequent law or any provision thereof
inconsistent with this Article shall not have retrospective
operation.
(3) The salary, allowances and pension of the
President shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund.
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 33
(4) Parliament may by resolution increase, but shall
not reduce, the salary, allowances or pension entitlement
of the holders of the office of President.
37. (1) If the President is of the opinion that by Exercise,
performance
reason of illness, absence from Sri Lanka or any other
and
cause he will be unable to exercise, perform and discharge discharge of
the powers, duties and functions of his office, he may powers,
duties and
appoint the Prime Minister to exercise, perform and
functions of
discharge the powers, duties and functions of the office of the President
by the Prime
President during such period and may also appoint one of
Minister
the other Ministers of the Cabinet to act in the office of
Prime Minister during such period:
Provided that if the office of Prime Minister be
then vacant or the Prime Minister is unable to act, the
President may appoint the Speaker to exercise, perform
and discharge the powers, duties and functions of the
office of president during such period.
(2) If the Chief Justice in consultation with the
Speaker is of the opinion that the President is temporarily
unable to exercise, perform and discharge the powers,
duties and functions of his office and is unable to make an
appointment in terms of paragraph (1) of this Article, he
shall communicate in writing his opinion to the Speaker
and thereupon the Prime Minister shall exercise, perform
and discharge the powers, duties and functions of the
office of President during such period and shall appoint
one of the Ministers of the Cabinet to act in the office of
Prime Minister during such period, notwithstanding the
absence of such appointment as is provided for in
paragraph (1) of this Article:
Provided that if the office of Prime Minister be
then vacant or the Prime Minister is unable to act, the
Speaker shall exercise, perform and discharge the powers,
duties and functions of the office of President during such
period.
34 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
(3) The provisions of the Constitution relating
to the President (other than the provisions of paragraph (2)
of Article 32) shall apply, in so far as they can be applied,
to the person so exercising, performing and discharging
the powers, duties and functions of the office of President.
(4) In this Article and in Articles 38(1)(b) and
40(1), “the Speaker” includes, during any period when
Parliament is dissolved, the person who held the office of
Speaker immediately before the dissolution of Parliament.
Vacation of 38. (1) The office of President shall become vacant –
office by
President
(a) upon his death;
(b) if he resigns his office by a writing under
his hand addressed to the Speaker;
(c) if he ceases to be a citizen of Sri Lanka;
(d) if the person elected as President wilfully
fails to assume office within 31[two
weeks] from the date of commencement
of his term of office;
(e) if he is removed from office as provided
in the next succeeding paragraph; or
(f) if the Supreme Court in the exercise
of its powers under Article 130(a)
determines that his election as
President was void and does not
determine that any other person was
duly elected as President.
(2) (a) Any Member of Parliament may, by a
writing addressed to the Speaker, give notice of a
resolution alleging that the President is permanently
incapable of discharging the functions of his office by
31 - Substituted by the Third Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 3.
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 35
reason of mental or physical infirmity or that the President
has been guilty of –
(i) intentional violation of the Constitution,
(ii) treason,
(iii) bribery,
(iv) misconduct or corruption involving the
abuse of the powers of his office, or
(v) any offence under any law, involving
moral turpitude and setting out full
particulars of the allegation or allegations
made and seeking an inquiry and report
thereon by the Supreme Court.
(b) No notice of such resolution shall be
entertained by the Speaker or placed on the Order Paper of
Parliament unless it complies with the provisions of sub
-paragraph (a) and –
(i) such notice of resolution is signed by
not less than two-thirds of the whole
number of Members of Parliament; or
(ii) such notice of resolution is signed by not
less than one-half of the whole number of
Members of Parliament and the Speaker
is satisfied that such allegation or
allegations merit inquiry and report by
the Supreme Court.
(c) Where such resolution is passed by not
less than two-thirds of the whole number of Members
(including those not present) voting in its favour, the
allegation or allegations contained in such resolution shall
be referred by the Speaker to the Supreme Court for inquiry
and report.
36 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
(d) The Supreme Court shall, after due inquiry at
which the President shall have the right to appear and to be
heard, in person or by an Attorney-at-Law, make a report of
its determination to Parliament together with the reasons
therefor.
(e) Where the Supreme Court reports to
Parliament that in its opinion the President is permanently
incapable of discharging the functions of his office by
reason of mental or physical infirmity or that the President
has been guilty of any of the other allegations contained in
such resolution, as the case may be, Parliament may by a
resolution passed by not less than two-thirds of the whole
number of Members (including those not present) voting in
its favour remove the President from office.
Determination 39. (1) Where the Supreme Court in the exercise of its
by the
jurisdiction under Article 130 determines –
Supreme
Court that
the President (a) that the election of the President was void
was not duly
and does not determine that any other
elected or the
election of the person was duly elected, then, a poll for
President was the election of the President shall be taken
void
not later than three months from the date of
the determination; or
(b) that any other person was duly elected as
President, then, such other person shall
assume the office of President within one
month of the date of the determination.
For the purposes of Article 38(1)(d), the date of
commencement of the term of office of the new President
shall be the date of his election or the date of the
determination, as the case may be.
(2) Upon the Supreme Court making any such
determination as is referred to in paragraph (1) of this
Article, the person who was exercising, performing and
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 37
discharging the powers, duties and functions of the office
of President shall forthwith cease to exercise, perform and
discharge such powers, duties and functions. During the
period intervening between the date of such determination
and the assumption of office by the new President, the
Prime Minister shall act in the office of President and
shall appoint one of the other Ministers of the Cabinet to
act in the office of the Prime Minister:
Provided that if the office of Prime Minister be
then vacant or the Prime Minister is unable to act, the
Speaker shall act in the office of the President.
(3) For the purposes of Article 30(2) and
notwithstanding the provisions of Article 31(4), the term
of office of the new President shall be deemed to have
commenced on the date on which the term of office of
the person whose election was determined to have been
void or undue would, but for such determination, have
commenced.
(4) The exercise, performance and discharge by any
person of the powers, duties and functions of the office
of President shall not be invalid by reason only of the
fact that the Supreme Court subsequently determines that
the election of such person as President was void or
undue.
(5) The provisions of this Article shall apply
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Article 40.
40. (1) (a) If the office of President shall become Vacation of
office by
vacant prior to the expiration of his term of office,
President
Parliament shall elect as President one of its Members and
election of
who is qualified to be elected to the office of President.
succeeding
Any person so succeeding to the office of President shall
President
hold office only for the unexpired period of the term of
office of the President vacating office.
38 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
(b) Such election shall be held as soon
as possible after, and in no case later than one month
from, the date of, occurrence of the vacancy. Such
election shall be by secret ballot and by an absolute
majority of the votes cast in accordance with such
procedure as Parliament may by law provide:
Provided that if such vacancy
occurs after the dissolution of Parliament, the President
shall be elected by the new Parliament within one month
of its first meeting.
(c) During the period between the
occurrence of such vacancy and the assumption of office
by the new President, the Prime Minister shall act in
the office of President and shall appoint one of the
other Ministers of the Cabinet to act in the office of
Prime Minister:
Provided that if the office of Prime
Minister be then vacant or the Prime Minister is unable to
act, the Speaker shall act in the office of President.
(2) The provisions of the Constitution relating to
the President (other than the provisions of paragraph (2)
of Article 32) shall apply, in so far as they can be applied,
to an acting President.
(3) Parliament shall by law provide for all matters
relating to the procedure for the election of the President
by Parliament and all other matters necessary or
incidental thereto.
41. (1) The President shall have the power to
President's
staff appoint such Secretaries, and, in consultation with the
Cabinet of Ministers, such other officers and staff as are
in his opinion necessary to assist him in the exercise,
performance and discharge of the powers, duties and
functions of his office, and to determine their terms and
conditions of service.
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 39
(2) The salaries of such Secretaries, officers and
staff shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund.
(3) Such Secretaries, officers and staff shall be
deemed to be public officers except that the dismissal
and disciplinary control of such Secretaries, officers and
staff shall be vested in the President, who may delegate to
any such Secretary his powers of dismissal and
disciplinary control in respect of any such officers or staff.
(4) Every such Secretary, officer or member of the
staff shall cease to hold office upon a new President
assuming office.
(5) Where any such Secretary, officer or member of
the staff so ceases to hold office, the Cabinet of Ministers
may appoint such Secretary, officer or member of the staff
to any post in the Public Service:
Provided that any such Secretary, officer or member
of the staff who immediately prior to his appointment as
Secretary, officer or member of the staff was in the Public
or Local Government Service or in the service of a Public
Corporation shall be entitled to revert to such service
without loss of seniority upon a new President assuming
office.
(6) The proviso to paragraph (5) of this Article shall,
mutatis mutandis, apply to any person referred to in that
proviso upon–
(a) the President terminating the services
of such person, otherwise than by
dismissal on disciplinary grounds; or
(b) the resignation of such person, unless
disciplinary proceedings are pending or
contemplated against such person on the
date of his resignation.
40 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
(7) For the purposes of paragraphs (5) and (6) of
this Article any person who has continuously held the
office of Secretary to the President, Secretary to any
Ministry or any office in the President’s staff or any one
or more of such offices shall be deemed to have
continuously held the office which such person last held.
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 41
32[CHAPTER VII A
THE CONSTITUTIONAL COUNCIL
41A. (1) There shall be a Constitutional Council C onstitution
of the
(in this Chapter referred to as the “Council”) which shall
Constitutional
consist of the following members:– Council
(a) the Prime Minister;
(b) the Speaker;
(c) the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament;
(d) one Member of Parliament appointed by the
President;
(e) five persons appointed by the President, upon
being nominated as follows:-
(i) one Member of Parliament nominated
by agreement of the majority of the
Members of Parliament representing the
Government;
(ii) one Member of Parliament nominated
by agreement of the majority of the
Members of Parliament of the political
party or independent group to which the
Leader of the Opposition belongs; and
(iii) three persons nominated by the Speaker
by agreement of the Prime Minister and
the Leader of the Opposition; and
(f) one Member of Parliament nominated by
agreement of the Members of Parliament
other than those representing the Government
and those belonging to the political party or
independent group to which the Leader of
the Opposition belongs, and appointed by the
President.
32 - Chapter VII A substituted by the Twenty First Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 2.
42 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
(2) The Speaker shall be the Chairman of the Council.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Speaker to ensure
that nominations for appointments under sub-paragraph
(e) or sub-paragraph (f) of paragraph (1) are made, whenever
an occasion for such nominations arises.
(4) in nominating the five persons referred to in
sub-paragraph (e) of paragraph (1), the Prime Minister, the
Speaker and the Leader of the Opposition or the Members
of Parliament, as the case may be, shall ensure that the
Council reflects the pluralistic character of Sri Lankan
society, including professional and social diversity.
(5) The persons who are not Members of Parliament
to be appointed under sub-paragraph (e) of paragraph (1)
shall be persons of eminence and integrity who have
distinguished themselves in public or professional life
and who are not members of any political party whose
nomination shall be approved by Parliament.
(6) The President shall, within fourteen days of
the receipt of a written communication specifying the
nominations made under sub-paragraphs (e) and (f) of
paragraph (1), make the necessary appointments.
(7) (a) On the dissolution of Parliament, notwithstanding
the provisions of paragraph (2) of Article 64, the Speaker
shall continue to hold office as a member of the Council,
until a Member of Parliament is elected to be the Speaker
under paragraph (1) of the aforesaid Article.
(b) Notwithstanding the dissolution of Parliament,
the Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition and the
Members of Parliament who are members of the Council,
shall continue to hold office as members of such Council,
until such time after a General Election following such
dissolution, a Member of Parliament is appointed as the
Prime Minister or recognized as the Leader of the Opposition
or such number of Members of Parliament are appointed
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 43
as Members of the Council under sub-paragraphs (d), (e)
and (f) of paragraph (1), as the case may be.
(8) (a) The member of the Council appointed under
sub-paragraph (d) of Paragraph (1), shall hold office
for a period of three years from the date of appointment
unless the member earlier resigns his office by writing
addressed to the President or is removed from office by
the President.
(b) Every member of the Council appointed
under sub-paragraphs (e) and (f) of paragraph (1) shall
hold office for a period of three years from the date
of appointment unless the member earlier resigns his
office by writing addressed to the President or is removed
from office by the President on a resolution passed by
the majority of the Members of Parliament (including
those not present) voting in its favour on the grounds of
physical or mental incapacity and is unable to function
further in office or is convicted by a court of law for any
offence involving moral turpitude or if a resolution for
the imposition of civic disability upon him has been
passed in terms of Article 81 of the Constitution or
is deemed to have vacated his office under paragraph (7)
of Article 41E.
(9) In the event of there being a vacancy among
the members appointed under sub-paragraphs (d), (e) or (f)
of paragraph (1), the President shall, within fourteen days
of the occurrence of such vacancy and having regard
to the provisions of the aforementioned sub-paragraphs,
appoint another person to succeed such member. Any
person so appointed, shall hold office during the
unexpired part of the period of office of the member
whom he succeeds.
(10) A member appointed under sub-paragraph
(d), (e) or (f) of paragraph (1), shall not be eligible for
re-appointment.
44 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
(11) The appointments made by the President under
sub-paragraphs (d), (e) and (f) of paragraph (1), shall be
communicated to the Speaker.
Council to 41B. (1) No person shall be appointed by the
recommend
President as the Chairman or a member of any of the
appointments
Commissions specified in the Schedule to this Article,
except on a recommendation of the Council.
(2) The provisions of paragraph (1) of this Article
shall apply in respect of any person appointed to act as the
Chairman or as a member of any such Commission.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Council to recommend
to the President fit and proper persons for appointment
as Chairmen or members of the Commissions specified
in the Schedule to this Article, whenever the occasion
for such appointments arises, and such recommendations
shall endeavour to ensure that such recommendations
reflect the pluralistic character of Sri Lankan society,
including gender. In the case of the Chairmen of such
Commissions, the Council shall recommend three persons
for appointment, and the President shall appoint one of the
persons recommended as Chairman.
(4) The President shall appoint the Chairmen and the
members of the Commissions specified in the Schedule
to this Article, within fourteen days of receiving the
recommendations of the Council for such appointments.
(5) No person appointed under paragraph (1) or
a person appointed to act as the Chairman or a member of
any such Commission, shall be removed except as provided
for in the Constitution or in any written law, and where
there is no such provision, such person shall be removed
by the President only with the prior approval of the Council.
(6) All the Commissions referred to in the
Schedule to this Article shall be responsible and
answerable to Parliament.
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 45
SCHEDULE
(a) The Election Commission.
(b) The Public Service Commission.
(c) The National Police Commission.
(d) The Audit Service Commission.
(e) The Human Rights Commission of Sri
Lanka.
(f) The Commission to Investigate Allegations
of Bribery or Corruption.
(g) The Finance Commission.
(h) The Delimitation Commission.
(i) The National Procurement Commission.
41C. (1) No person shall be appointed by the Council to
President to any of the Offices specified in the Schedule approve
appointments
to this Article, unless such appointment has been approved
by the Council upon a recommendation made to the
Council by the President.
(2) The provisions of paragraph (1) of this Article
shall apply in respect of any person appointed to act for a
period exceeding fourteen days, in any Office specified in
the Schedule to this Article:
Provided that no person shall be appointed to
act in any such office for successive periods not exceeding
fourteen days, unless such acting appointment has been
approved by the Council on a recommendation by the
President.
(3) No person appointed to any Office specified in
the Schedule to this Article or to act in any such Office,
shall be removed from such Office except as provided
for in the Constitution or in any law.
46 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
(4) In the discharge of its function relating to the
appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court and the
President and Judges of the Court of Appeal, the Council
shall obtain the views of the Chief Justice.
SCHEDULE
PART I
(a) The Chief Justice and the Judges of the
Supreme Court.
(b) The President and the Judges of the Court of
Appeal.
(c) The Members of the Judicial Service
Commission, other than the Chairman.
PART II
(a) The Attorney-General.
(b) The Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.
(c) The Auditor-General.
(d) The Inspector-General of Police.
(e) The Parliamentary Commissioner for
Administration (Ombudsman)
(f) The Secretary-General of Parliament.
Secretary- 4lD. (1) There shall be a Secretary-General to the
General and Council who shall be appointed by the Council for a term
other officers
of three years. Upon the expiration of his term of office,
of the Council
the Secretary­General shall be eligible for re-appointment.
(2) The Council may appoint such officers as it
considers necessary for the discharge of its functions, on
such terms and conditions as may be determined by the
Council.
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 47
41E. (1) The Council shall meet at least twice every Meetings of
month, and as often as may be necessary to discharge the the Council
functions assigned to the Council by the provisions of
this Chapter or by any law, and such meetings shall be
summoned by the Secretary-General to the Council on the
direction of the Chairman of the Council.
(2) The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of
the Council and in the absence of the Chairman, the Prime
Minister, and in the absence of the Prime Minister, the
Leader of the Opposition shall preside at the meetings
of the Council.
(3) The quorum for any meeting of the Council shall
be five members.
(4) The Council shall endeavour to make every
recommendation, approval or decision it is required to
make by unanimous decision and in the absence of a
unanimous decision, no recommendation, approval or
decision made by the Council shall be valid, unless
supported by not less than five members of the Council
present at such meeting.
(5) The Chairman or the other member presiding
shall not have an original vote, but in the event of an
equality of votes on any question for decision at any
meeting of the Council, the Chairman or other member
presiding at such meeting, shall have a casting vote.
(6) The Procedure in regard to meetings of the
Council and the transaction of business at such meetings
shall be determined by the Council, including procedures
to be followed in regard to the recommendation or
approval of persons suitable for any appointment under
Article 41B or Article 41C.
(7) Any member of the Council appointed under
sub-paragraphs (d), (e), or (f) of paragraph (1) of Article
41A, who without obtaining prior leave of the Council
48 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
absents himself from three consecutive meetings of the
Council, shall be deemed to have vacated office with effect
from the date of the third of such meetings.
(8) The Council shall have the power to act
notwithstanding the fact that it has not been fully
constituted or that there is a vacancy in its membership.
No act, proceeding or decision of the Council carried out
or made by the majority vote of the members shall be
or deemed to be invalid by reason only of the fact that
the Council has not been fully constituted or that there
has been a vacancy in its membership or that there has
been any defect in the appointment of a member.
Continuation 41F. Notwithstanding the expiration of the term of
in office of office of the members of the Council or of the members of
the members
any Commission specified in the Schedule to Article 41B,
of the
Council the members of the Council or of such other Commission
shall continue in office until the assumption of office
by the new members of the Council or of such other
Commission.
Powers and 41G. (1) The Council shall, once in every three
duties of the months, submit to the President and Parliament a report
Council
of its activities during the preceding three months.
(2) The Council shall perform and discharge such
other duties and functions as may be imposed or assigned
to the Council by the Constitution, or by any other written
law.
(3) The Council shall have the power to make rules
relating to the performance and discharge of its duties and
functions. All such rules shall be published in the Gazette
and be placed before Parliament within three months of
such publication.
Expenses to 41H. The expenses incurred by the Council shall be
be charged charged on the Consolidated Fund.
on the
Consolidated
Fund
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 49
41J. Subject to the provisions of Article 126, no
Finality of
court shall have the power or jurisdiction to entertain, hear decisions of
the Council
or decide or call in question, on any ground whatsoever,
or in any manner whatsoever, any decision of the Council
or any approval or recommendation made by the Council,
which decision, approval or recommendation shall be
final and conclusive for all purposes.]
50 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
33[CHAPTER VIII
THE EXECUTIVE
The Cabinet of Ministers
President to 42. The President shall be responsible to Parliament
be responsible
for the due exercise, performance and discharge of his
to Parliament
powers, duties and functions under the Constitution and
any written law, including the law for the time being
relating to public security.
Prime 43. (1) There shall be a Cabinet of Ministers charged
Minister with the direction and control of the Government of the
and the
Republic.
Cabinet of
Ministers
(2) The Cabinet of Ministers shall be collectively
responsible and answerable to Parliament.
(3) The President shall be a member of the Cabinet
of Ministers and shall be the Head of the Cabinet of
Ministers:
Provided that, notwithstanding the dissolution
of the Cabinet of Ministers under the provisions of the
Constitution, the President shall continue in office.
(4) The President shall appoint as Prime Minister
the Member of Parliament, who, in the President's
opinion, is most likely to command the confidence of
Parliament.
Ministers 44. (1) The President shall, in consultation with
and their
the Prime Minister, where he considers such consultation
subjects and
functions to be necessary, determine the number of Ministers of
the Cabinet of Ministers and the Ministries and the
assignment of subjects and functions to such Ministers.
(2) The President shall, in consultation with the
33 - Chapter VIII substituted by the Twenty First Amendment to the Constitution Sec. 3.
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 51
Prime Minister, appoint from among Members of Parliament,
Ministers, to be in charge of the Ministries so determined.
(3) The President shall be the Minister in charge
of the subject of Defence and may exercise, perform
and discharge the powers, duties and functions of any
Minister of the Cabinet of Ministers or any Minister
who is not a member of the Cabinet of Ministers, subject
to the provisions of the Constitution, for not exceeding
fourteen days during a period within which any subject
or function is not assigned to any such Minister under
the provisions of paragraph (1) of this Article or under
paragraph (1) of Article 45 and accordingly, any reference
in the Constitution or any written law to the Minster to
whom such subject or function is assigned, shall be read
and construed as a reference to the President:
Provided however, preceding provisions of this
paragraph shall not preclude the President from assigning
any subject or function to himself in consultation with
the Prime Minister and accordingly, any reference in
the Constitution or any written law to the Minister to
whom such subject or function is assigned, shall be read
and construed as a reference to the President.
(4) The President may at any time change the
assignment of subjects and functions and the composition
of the Cabinet of Ministers. Such changes shall not affect
the continuity of the Cabinet of Ministers and the continuity
of its responsibility to Parliament.
45. (1) The President may, in consultation with the Ministers
Prime Minister, appoint from among Members of who are not
members of
Parliament, Ministers who shall not be members of the
the Cabinet
Cabinet of Ministers. of Ministers
(2) The President may, in consultation with the
Prime Minister where he considers such consultation to be
52 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
necessary, determine the assignment of subjects and functions
to Ministers appointed under paragraph (1) of this Article
and the Ministries, if any, which are to be in charge of,
such Ministers.
(3) The President may at any time change any
assignment made under paragraph (2).
(4) Every Minister appointed under paragraph (1)
shall be responsible and answerable to the Cabinet
of Ministers and to Parliament.
(5) Any Minister of the Cabinet of Ministers may,
by Notification published in the Gazette, delegate to
any Minister who is not a member of the Cabinet of
Ministers, any power or duty pertaining to any subject
or function assigned to such Cabinet Minister, or any
power or duty conferred or imposed on him by any
written law, and it shall be lawful for such other Minister
to exercise and perform any power or duty delegated
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the written
law by which that power or duty is conferred or imposed
on such Minister of the Cabinet of Ministers.
Deputy 46. (1) The President may, in consultation with
Ministers
the Prime Minister, appoint from among Members of
Parliament, Deputy Ministers to assist Ministers of the
Cabinet of Ministers in the performance of their duties.
(2) Any Minister of the Cabinet of Ministers may,
by Notification published in the Gazette, delegate to his
Deputy Minister, any power or duty pertaining to any
subject or function assigned to him or any power or duty
conferred or imposed on him by any written law, and
it shall be lawful for such Deputy Minister to exercise
and perform any power or duty delegated notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in the written law by which
that power or duty is conferred or imposed on such
Minister.
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 53
47. (1) The total number of - Tenure of
office of the
(a) Ministers of the Cabinet of Ministers Prime
Minister,
shall not exceed thirty; and
and the
limitation of
(b) Ministers who are not members of
numbers
the Cabinet of Ministers and Deputy and tenure
of office of
Ministers shall not, in the aggregate,
Ministers
exceed forty. and Deputy
Ministers
(2) The Prime Minister shall continue to hold office
throughout the period during which the Cabinet of
Ministers continues to function under the provisions of the
Constitution unless he -
(a) is removed by a writing under the hand
of the President;
(b) resigns his office by a writing under
his hand addressed to the President; or
(c) ceases to be a Member of Parliament.
(3) A Minister of the Cabinet of Ministers, a Minister
who is not a member of the Cabinet of Ministers and a
Deputy Minister, shall continue to hold office throughout
the period during which the Cabinet of Ministers continues
to function under the provisions of the Constitution unless
he -
(a) is removed from office under the hand
of the President in consultation with the
Prime Minister;
(b) resigns from office by a writing under
his hand addressed to the President; or
(c) ceases to be a Member of Parliament.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in paragraph
(1) of this Article, where the recognized political party or
the independent group which obtains highest number of
54 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
seats in Parliament forms a National Government, the number
of Ministers in the Cabinet of Ministers, the number of
Ministers who are not Cabinet of Ministers and the number
of Deputy Ministers shall be determined by Parliament.
(5) For the purpose of paragraph (4), National
Government means, a Government formed by the recognized
political party or the independent group which obtains
the highest number of seats in Parliament together with
the other recognized political parties or the independent
groups.
Cabinet of 48. (1) The Cabinet of Ministers functioning
Ministers immediately prior to the dissolution of Parliament shall,
after
notwithstanding such dissolution, continue to function and
dissolution of
Parliament shall cease to function upon the conclusion of the General
Election and accordingly, the Prime Minister and the
Ministers of the Cabinet of Ministers, shall continue to
function unless they cease to hold office as provided in
sub-paragraph (a) of paragraph (2) or sub-paragraph (a) or
(b) of paragraph (3) of Article 47 and shall comply with the
criteria set out by the Commissioner-General of Elections
and shall not cause any undue influence on the General
Election.
(2) Notwithstanding the death, removal from office
or resignation of the Prime Minister, during the period
intervening between the dissolution of Parliament and the
conclusion of the General Election, the Cabinet of
Ministers shall continue to function with the other
Ministers of the Cabinet of Ministers as its members, until
the conclusion of the General Election. The President may
appoint one such Minister to exercise, perform and
discharge the powers, duties and functions of the Prime
Minister.
(3) On the death, removal from office or resignation,
during the period intervening between the dissolution
of Parliament and the conclusion of the General Election,
The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 55
of a Minister of the Cabinet of Ministers, the President may,
in consultation with the Prime Minister, appoint any other
Minister to be the Minister in charge of the Ministry of such
Minister or to exercise, perform and discharge the powers,
duties and functions of such Minister.
49. (1) On the Prime Minister ceasing to hold
Dissolution
office by death, resignation or otherwise, except during the of the
Cabinet of
period intervening between the dissolution of Parliament
Ministers
and the conclusion of the General Election, the Cabinet
of Ministers shall, unless the President has in the exercise
of his powers under Article 70, dissolved Parliament,
stand dissolved and the President shall appoint a Prime
Minister, Ministers of the Cabinet of Ministers, Ministers
who are not members of the Cabinet of Ministers and
Deputy Ministers in terms of Articles 43, 44, 45 and 46:
Provided that if after the Prime Minister so
ceases to hold office, Parliament is dissolved, the Cabinet
of Ministers shall continue to function with the other
Ministers of the Cabinet as its members, until the conclusion
of the General Election. The President may appoint one
such Minister to exercise, perform and discharge the
powers, duties and functions of the Prime Minister, and
the provisions of Article 48 shall, mutatis mutandis, apply.
(2) If Parliament rejects the Statement of
Government Policy or the Appropriation Bill or passes a
vote of no-confidence in the Government, the Cabinet of
Ministers shall stand dissolved, and the President shall,
unless he has in the exercise of his powers under Article 70,
dissolved Parliament, appoint a Prime Minister, Ministers
of the Cabinet of Ministers and Deputy Ministers in terms
of Articles 43, 44, 45 and 46.
50. Whenever a Minister of the Cabinet of Ministers, Acting
Ministers
a Minister who is not a member of the Cabinet of Ministers
and Deputy
or a Deputy Minister is unable to discharge the functions Ministers
of his office, the President may, in consultation with the
56 The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
Prime Minister, appoint any Member of Parliament to act
in the place of such Minister of the Cabinet of Ministers,
Minister who is not a member of the Cabinet of Ministers
or a Deputy Minister.
Secretary to 51. (1) (a) There shall be a Secretary to the Prime
the Prime Minister who shall be appointed by the President.
Minister and
Secretary to
(b) The Secretary shall have charge of the
the Cabinet
of Ministers office of the Prime Minister and shall perform and
discharge the duties and functions of his office, subject
to the directions of the Prime Minister.
(2) (a) There shall be a Secretary to the Cabinet of
Ministers who shall be appointed by the President.
(b) The Secretary shall, subject to the direction
of the President, have charge of the Office of the Cabinet
of Ministers, and shall discharge and perform such other
functions and duties as may be assigned to him by the
President or the Cabinet of Ministers.
Secretaries to 52. (1) There shall be a Secretary for every Ministry
Ministries
of a Minister of the Cabinet of Ministers, who shall be
appointed by the President.
(2) The Secretary to a Ministry shall, subject to
the direction and control of his Minister, exercise
supervision over the departments of Government and
other institutions in charge of the Minister.
(3) Notwithstanding the dissolution of the Cabinet of
Ministers under the provisions of the Constitution, the
Secretary to a Ministry shall continue to hold office
until a new Secretary is appointed to such Ministry, in
terms of the provisions of the Constitution:
Provided however, the Secretary to a Ministry
shall cease to hold office upon a determination by the
President under Article 44 or 45 which results in such
Ministry ceasing to exist.
[TRUNCATED: processed first 80 of 306 pages]