CHAPTER 105
CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE
AN ORDINANCE TO CONSOLIDATE AND AMEND THE LAW
RELATING TO THE PROCEDURE OF THE CIVIL COURTS.
Ordinance Nos,
2 of 1889
12 of 1895
23 of 1901
12 of 1904
14 of 1907
31 of 1909
9 of 1917
39 of 1921
42 of 1921
21 of 1927
23 of 1927
25 of 1927
15 of 1930
26 of 1930
4 of 1940
18 of 1944
39 of 1945
Law Nos,
12 of 1973
44 of 1973
25 of 1975
19 of 1977
20 of 1977
Act Nos,
7 of 1949
43 of 1949
20 of 1954
48 of 1954
32 of 1957
49 of 1958
3 of 1960
24 of 1961
5 of 1964
23 of 1969
24 of 1969
53 of 1980
79 of 1988
2 of 1990
6 of 1990
9 of 1991
6 of 1993
14 of 1993
11 of 1995
12 of 1996
14 of 1997
38 of 1998
34 of 2000
20 of 2002
4 of 2005
11 of 2010
8 of 2017
5 of 2022
17 of 2022
36 of 2022
7 of 2023
20 of 2023
29 of 2023
43 of 2024
st
[1 August , 1890 ]
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
Short title. 1. This Ordinance may be cited as the Civil Procedure Code.
[section 2 and 3 - Omitted]
Where no provision 4. In every case in which no provision is made by this Ordinance, the
is made special
directions to be procedure and practice hitherto in force shall be followed, and if any
given by Court of matter of procedure or practice for which no provision is made by this
Appeal.
Ordinance or by any law for the time being in force shall after this
Ordinance comes into operation arise before any court, such court
shall thereupon make application to the Court of Appeal for, and the
Court of Appeal shall and is hereby required to give, such special
orders and directions thereupon as the justice of the case shall require
:
Provided always that nothing in this Ordinance contained shall be held
in any way to affect or modify any special rules of procedure which,
under or by virtue of the provisions of any enactment, may have from
time to time been laid down or prescribed to be followed by any civil
court in Sri Lanka in the conduct of any action, matter, or thing of
which any such court can lawfully take cognizance, except in so far as
any such provisions are by this Ordinance expressly repealed or
modified.
Interpretation. 5. The following words and expressions in this Ordinance shall have
[2, 8 of 2017]
the meanings hereby assigned to them, unless there is something in
[7, 27 of 2023]
the subject or context repugnant thereto;
[2, 43 of 2024]
"action" is a proceeding for the prevention or redress of a wrong;
[2,20 of 1977] "Attorney-General" includes the Solicitor-General, the Additional
Solicitor-General and any State Counsel specially authorized by the
Attorney-General to represent the Attorney-General;
"cause of action" is the wrong for the prevention or redress of which
an action may be brought, and includes the denial of a right, the
refusal to fulfill an obligation, the neglect to perform a duty and the
infliction of an affirmative injury;
"civil court" means a court in which civil actions may be brought;
"counsel" means an attorney-at-law instructed by a registered
attorney;
"court" means a Judge empowered by law to act judicially alone, or a
body of Judges empowered by law to act judicially as a body, when
such Judge or body of Judges is acting judicially;
[2, 8 of 2017] "court expert" shall mean a person specially skilled or knowledgeable
in any subject, field or disciplines;
"decree" means the formal expression of an adjudication upon any
right claimed or defence set up in a civil court, when such adjudication,
so far as regards the court expressing it, decides the action or appeal;
(An order rejecting a plaint is a decree within this definition.)
[2, 43 of 2024] "electronic" shall have the same meaning assigned to it by the
Electronic Transactions Act, No.19 of 2006;".
[2, 29 of 2023] "document" includes a document in electronic form;
"document in electronic form" includes -
(a) any information consisting of any contemporaneous
recording or reproduction thereof or any information
contained in a statement produced by a computer within
the meaning of the Evidence (Special Provisions) Act, No.
14 of 1995;
(b) any information contained in a data message, electronic
document, electronic record, electronic communication or
other information or transaction in electronic form within the
meaning of the Electronic Transactions Act, No. 19 of
2006;
(c) such other document or information or record or
communication or transaction in electronic form that may
be specified by any other written law;
(d) such other document or information or record or
communication that is stored on devices, servers and
back-up systems in any medium that encompasses
computer technology or any such document or information
or record or communication that has been deleted; or
(e) any metadata and other embedded data which is not
typically visible on a computer screen or print out;
[2,79 of 1988] "Fiscal" includes a Deputy Fiscal
"foreign court" means a court situate beyond the limits of, and not
having authority in, Sri Lanka;
"foreign judgment" means the judgment of a foreign court;
[2,20 of 1977] "Judge" means the presiding officer of a court and includes Judges of
the Supreme Court and of the Court of Appeal, District Judges, Judges
of Family Courts and Judges of Primary Courts;
"judgment" means the statement given by the Judge of the grounds of
a decree or order;
"judgment-creditor" and " decree-holder " mean any person in whose
favor a decree or order capable of execution has been made, and
include any transferee of such decree or order;
"judgment-debtor" means any person against whom a decree or order
capable of execution has been made;
[2,20 of 1977] "legal document" includes all processes, pleadings, petitions,
affidavits, notices, motions and other documents, proceedings, and
written communications;
[2, 8 of 2017] "local authority" means any Municipal Council, Urban Council or
Pradeshiya Sabha and includes any Authority created and established
by or under any law to exercise, perform and discharge powers, duties
and functions corresponding to or similar to the powers, duties and
functions exercised, performed and discharged by any such Council or
Sabha;
"order" means the formal expression of any decision of a civil court
which is not a decree;
"original court " includes District Courts, Family Courts and Primary
Courts;
[2, 8 of 2017] "Provincial Council" shall mean a Provincial Council established under
Article 154A of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of
Sri Lanka 1978;
"Public Corporation" means any corporation, board or other body
which was or is established by or under any written law other than the
Companies Act, No. 7 of 2007, with funds or capital wholly or partly
provided by the Government by way of grant, loan or otherwise;
"Public Office" shall have the same meaning as defined in the National
Archives Law No. 48 of 1973;
[2,20 of 1977] "Public Trustee" means the Public Trustee of Sri Lanka appointed
under the Public Trustee Ordinance and includes a Deputy Public
Trustee or any other state officer generally or specially authorized by
the Public Trustee to act on his behalf;
"recognized agent" includes the persons designated under that name
in section 25 and no others;
[2,20 of 1977] " registered attorney " means an attorney-at-law appointed under
Chapter V by a party or his recognized agent to act on his behalf;
[2,20 of 1977] "Registrar" in relation to a court - includes an Additional, Deputy or
Assistant Registrar;
"signed" includes "marked" when the person making the mark is
unable to write;
[2,20 of 1977] "the Island" and "this Island" means respectively the Island of Sri
lanka;
"written" and "writing" include "printed" and "print" and "lithographed"
and "lithograph" respectively.
PART I
OF ACTIONS IN GENERAL
CHAPTER II
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Action. 6. Every application to a court for relief or remedy obtainable through
the exercise of the court's power or authority, or otherwise to invite its
interference, constitutes an action.
Procedure of an 7. The procedure of an action may be either " regular " or " summary ".
action.
Illustrations
In actions of which the procedure is regular, the
person against whom the application is made is
called upon to formally state his answer to the
case which is alleged against him in the
application before any question of fact is
entertained by the court, or its discretion thereon is
in any degree exercised.
In actions of which the procedure is summary, the
applicant simultaneously with preferring his
application supports with proper evidence the
statement of fact made therein; and if the court in
its discretion considers that a prima facie case is
thus made out
(a) either the order sought is immediately passed
against the defendant before he has been afforded
an opportunity of opposing it, but subject to the
expressed qualification that it will only lake effect
in the event of his not showing any good cause
against it on a day appointed therein for the
purpose;
(b) or a day is appointed by the court for
entertaining the matter of the application on the
evidence furnished, and notice is given to the
defendant that he will be heard in opposition to it
on that day if he thinks proper to come before the
court for that purpose.
Procedure of action 8. Save and except actions in which it is by this Ordinance or any
to be ordinarily
regular. other law specially provided that proceedings may be taken by way of
[2, 53 of 1980] summary procedure, every action shall commence and proceed by a
course of regular procedure, as hereinafter prescribed.
CHAPTER III
OF THE COURT OF INSTITUTION OF ACTION
Institution of 9. Subject to the pecuniary or other limitations prescribed by any law,
actions: in what
court. action shall be instituted in the court within the local limits of whose
[3, 43 of 2024] jurisdiction -
[3, 43 of 2024] (a) a party plaintiff or a party defendant resides; or
(b) the land in respect of which the action is brought lies or
is situate in whole or in part; or
(c) the cause of action arises; or
(d) the contract sought to be enforced was made.
When one of two or When it is alleged to be uncertain within the local limits of the
more courts may
jurisdiction of which of two or more courts any immovable property is
entertain an action.
situate, any one of those courts may, if satisfied that there is ground
for the alleged uncertainty, record a statement to that effect, and
thereupon proceed to entertain and dispose of any action relating to
that property; and its decree in the action shall have the same effect
as if the property were situate within the local limits of its jurisdiction:
Provided that the action is one with respect to which the court is
competent as regards the nature and value of the action to exercise
jurisdiction.
Of application for 10. Any of the parties to an action which is pending in any original
withdrawal and
transfer of action. court may, before trial, and after notice in writing to the other parties of
[3,20 1977] his intention so to do, apply to the Court of Appeal by motion, which
shall be supported by affidavit setting out the grounds on which it is
based, for the withdrawal of such action from the court in which it is
pending and for the transfer of it for trial to any other court competent
to try the same in respect of its nature and the amount or value of its
subject-matter. And the Court of Appeal may, on any such application
after hearing such of the parties as desire to be heard, and on being
satisfied that such withdrawal and transfer are desirable for any of the
following reasons;
(a) that a fair and impartial trial cannot be had in any
particular court or place; or
(b) that some question of law of unusual difficulty is likely to
arise; or
(c) that it is expedient on any other ground,
Withdraw any such action pending in any such court, and transfer it for
trial to any other such court as aforesaid, upon any terms that the
Court of Appeal shall think fit. When the action might have been
instituted in any one of several courts, the balance of convenience
only shall be deemed sufficient cause for such withdrawal and transfer
to one of the alternative courts.
Stamp duty. In no case in which any action is so transferred as aforesaid from one
court to another shall any stamp fee be leviable in the court to which
the action is transferred on any pleading or exhibit on which the proper
stamp fee has been paid in the court from which the action is so
transferred.
CHAPTER IV
OF PARTIES AND THEIR APPEARANCES,
APPLICATIONS, AND ACTS
Plaintiffs. 11. All persons may be joined as plaintiffs in whom the right to any
relief claimed is alleged to exist, whether jointly, severally, or in the
alternative, in respect of the same cause of action. And judgment may
be given for such one or more of the plaintiffs as may be found to be
entitled to relief for such relief as he or they may be entitled to, without
any amendment of the plaint for that purpose. But the defendant
though unsuccessful, shall be entitled to his costs occasioned by so
joining any person who is not found entitled to relief, unless the court
in disposing of the costs of the action otherwise directs.
Where joint tenants 12. Where two or more persons are entitled to the possession of
or tenants in
common. immovable property as joint tenants or tenants in common, one or
more of them may maintain an action in respect of his or their
undivided shares in the property in any case where such an action
might be maintained by all.
Substituted and 13. Where an action has been instituted in the name of the wrong
added plaintiffs.
person as plaintiff, or where it is doubtful whether it has been instituted
in the name of the right plaintiff, the court may at any stage of the
action, if satisfied that the action has been so commenced through a
bona fide mistake, and that it is necessary for the determination of the
real matter in dispute so to do, order any other person or persons, with
his or their consent, to be substituted or added as plaintiff or plaintiffs,
upon such terms as the court thinks just.
Defendants. 14. All persons may be joined as defendants against whom the right to
any relief is alleged to exist, whether jointly, severally, or in the
alternative, in respect of the same cause of action. And judgment may
be given against such one or more of the defendants as may be found
to be liable, according to their respective liabilities, without any
amendment.
Substitution where 14A.
person against
whom a right to any (1) Where a person against whom the right to any relief is
relief is alleged to alleged to exist is dead and the right to sue for such relief
exist dies and the
right to sue for relief survives, the person in whom such right is alleged to exist,
survives. may make an application by way of summary procedure
[2,6 of 1990]
supported by affidavit to the court in which an action for the
same may be instituted, in the following manner:-
(a) Where such person has died intestate leaving
an estate, specifying the name, description, and
place of abode of any person whom he alleges to
be the legal representative, as defined in section
394 (2), of the deceased and whom he desires to
be made the defendant in the proposed action in
place of the deceased. Such application shall
also specify the name, description, and place of
abode of the person or persons whom the
applicant alleges to be the other heir or heirs of
the deceased; or
(b) Where probate of the will or letters of
administration to the estate of the deceased has
not been issued or its issue is likely to be unduly
delayed, specifying, the name, description, and
place of abode of any person whom he alleges to
be the person to whom probate of the will or
letters of administration to the estate of the
deceased would ordinarily be issued and whom
he desires to be made the defendant in the
proposed action in place of the deceased. Such
application shall also specify the name,
description, and place of abode of the person or
persons whom the applicant alleged to be the
heir or heirs of the deceased.
(2) Upon receipt of an application under paragraph (a) of
subsection (1), and the court where it is satisfied that there
are grounds therefor, and, after the issue of notice on the
representative named in such application and such other
persons, if any, and after causing notice of such
application, (in the form No.2A in the First Schedule) to be
advertised in a local newspaper to be selected by the
court, or by such other mode of advertisement in lieu of
such publication as to the court seems sufficient, and after
such inquiry as the court may consider necessary and
upon such terms as it thinks fit, the court may order that
such representative or such other person as the court may
consider fit be appointed in place of the deceased, for the
institution of such action:
Provided, that the person to be so appointed in place of the
deceased may object that he is not the legal representative
of the deceased or that he should not be appointed in
place of the deceased.
(3) Upon receipt of an application under paragraph (b) of
subsection (1), the court may, where it is satisfied that
probate of the will or letters of administration to the estate
of the deceased has not been issued or is likely to be
unduly delayed, and, after the issue of notice on the person
alleged in such application to be the person to whom
probate of the will or letters of administration to the estate
of the deceased would ordinarily be issued and such other
persons, if any, causing notice of such application, (in the
form No. 2A in the First Schedule) to be advertised in a
local newspaper to be selected by the court or by some
other mode of advertisement in lieu of such publication as
to the court seems sufficient, and after such inquiry as the
court may consider necessary and upon such terms as it
thinks fit, order that the person, who appears to the court to
be the person to whom probate of the will or letters of
administration to the estate of the deceased would
ordinarily be issued, be appointed in place of the
deceased, for the institution of such action:
Provided, that the person to be so appointed may object
that he is not the person to whom probate of the will or
letters of administration to the estate of the deceased
would ordinarily be issued or that he should not be
appointed in place of the deceased.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2) or
subsection (3), the court may make an order under any
one of those subsections, only where-
(a) it is satisfied that the delay in the institution of
the action would render such action not
maintainable by reason of the provisions of the
Prescription Ordinance; or
(b) a period of six months had lapsed after the
death of the deceased.
(5) Where after an order appointing a representative in
place of the deceased has been made under subsection
(2) or subsection (3) and an action instituted against such
person in place of such deceased, an executor of the will,
or an administrator of the estate, as the case may be, of
such deceased, is appointed in proceedings instituted
under Chapter XXXVIII of this Code, such executor or
administrator shall, on the application by way of summary
procedure, supported by affidavit, made by the plaintiff or
any other party to such action or by such executor or
administrator, be substituted in place of the person
appointed under subsection (2) or subsection (3), and the
action shall thereupon proceed in the same manner as if
such executor or administrator had originally been made a
defendant, and had been a party to the previous
proceedings in the action.
Who may be joined 15. The plaintiff may, at his option, join as parties to the same action
as parties
defendant. all or any of the persons severally, or jointly and severally, liable on
any one contract, including parties to bills of exchange and promissory
notes.
Where numerous 16. Where there are numerous parties having a common interest in
parties, one may
sue or defend for bringing or defending an action, one or more of such parties may, with
all. Notice. the permission of the court, sue or be sued, or may defend in such an
action on behalf of all parties so interested. But the court shall in such
case give, at the expense of the party applying so to sue or defend,
notice of the institution of the action to all such parties, either by
personal service or (if from the number of parties or any other cause
such service is not reasonably practicable, then) by public
advertisement, as the court in each case may direct.
Misjoinder not to 17. No action shall be defeated by reason of the misjoinder or non-
defeat action.
joinder of parties, and the court may in every action deal with the
matter in controversy so far as regards the rights and interests of the
parties actually before it.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to enable plaintiffs to join in
respect of distinct causes of action.
If the consent of anyone who ought to be joined as a plaintiff cannot
be obtained, he may be made a defendant, the reasons therefor being
stated in the plaint.
Parties improperly 18.
joined may be
struck out. Addition of (1) The court may on or before the day first fixed for the
parties.
[3, 29 of 2023] pre-trial conference, upon the application of either party,
[3, 29 of 2023]
and on such terms as the court thinks just, order that the
name of any party, whether as plaintiff or as defendant
improperly joined, be struck out; and the court may at any
time, either upon or without such application, and on such
terms as the court thinks just, order that any plaintiff be
made a defendant, or that any defendant be made a
plaintiff, and that the name of any person who ought to
have been joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, or
whose presence before the court may be necessary in
order to enable the court effectually and completely to
adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved in that
action, be added.
(2) Every order for such amendment or for alteration of
parties shall state the facts and reasons which together
form the ground on which the order is made. And in the
case of a party being added, the added party or parties
shall be named, with the designation " added party ", in all
pleadings or processes or papers entitled in the action and
made after the date of the order.
Intervention not 19. No person shall be allowed to intervene in a pending action
otherwise allowed.
otherwise than in pursuance of, and in conformity with, the provisions
of the last preceding section. And no person shall be added as
plaintiff, or as the next friend of a plaintiff, without his own consent
thereto;
Except in under Provided however that any person on cases whose behalf an action is
section 16.
instituted or under section defended may apply to the 16. court to be
made a party, and all parties whose names are so added as
defendants shall be served with a summons in manner hereinafter
mentioned, and the proceedings as against them shall be deemed to
have begun only on the service of such summons.
Conduct of the 20. The court may give the conduct of the action to such plaintiff as it
action.
deems action proper.
Amendment of 21. Where a defendant is added, the plaint shall, unless the court
plaint.
direct otherwise, be amended in such manner as may be necessary,
and a copy of the amended plaint shall be served on the new
defendant and on the original defendants.
Objections for non- 22. All objections for want of parties, or for joinder of parties who have
joinder or mis
joinder to be taken no interest in the action, or for misjoinder as co- plaintiffs or co-
before theday first defendants, shall be taken at the earliest possible opportunity, and in
fixedfor pre-trial
conference. all cases before the day first fixed for pre-trial conference. And any
[4, 29 of 2023] such objection not so taken shall be deemed to have been waived by
the defendant.
Plaintiffs (or 23. When there are more plaintiffs than one, any one or more of them
defendants) may
authorize one of may be authorized by any other of them to appear, plead, or act for
them to act for such other in any proceeding under this Ordinance; and in like
them.
manner, when there are more defendants than one, any one or more
of them may be authorized by any other of them to appear, plead, or
act for such other in any such proceeding. The authority shall be in
writing signed by the party giving it, and shall be filed in court.
CHAPTER V
OF RECOGNIZED AGENTS AND ATTORNEYS-
AT-LAW
Appearances may 24. Any appearance, application, or act in or to any court, required or
be by party in
person, his authorized by law to be made or done by a party to an action or
recognized agent, appeal in such court, except only such appearances, applications, or
or attorney-at-law.
acts as by any law for the time being in force only attorneys-at-law are
authorized to make or do, and except when by any such law otherwise
expressly provided, may be made or done by the party in person, or
by his recognized agent, or by an attorney-at-law duly appointed by
the party or such agent to act on behalf of such party :
Provided that any such appearance shall be made by the party in
person, if the court so directs. An attorney-at-law instructed by a
registered attorney for this purpose, represents the registered attorney
in court.
Recognized agents.25. The recognized agents of parties by whom such appearances and
applications may be made or acts may be done are
(a) the Attorney-General, on behalf of the State in respect
of any court; who is also authorized to depute his power of
appointing a registered attorney on behalf of the State in
respect to any court to any person by a written document
to be signed by the Attorney-General, and to be filed in that
court;
(b) persons holding general powers of attorney from parties
not resident within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the
court within which limits the appearance or application is
made or act done, authorizing them to make such
appearances and applications, and do such acts on behalf
of such parties; which power, or a copy thereof certified by
an attorney-at-law or notary, shall in each case be filed in
the court;
[4,20 of 1977] (c) persons carrying on trade or business for and in the
names of parties not resident within the local limits of the
jurisdiction of the court within which limits the appearance
or application is made or act done, in matters connected
with such trade or business only, where no other agent is
expressly authorized to make such appearances and
applications and do such acts.
Processes served 26.
on the recognized
agent, effectual. (1) Processes served on the recognized agent of a party to
an action or appeal shall be as effectual as if the same had
been served on the party in person, unless the court
otherwise directs.
(2) The provisions of this Ordinance for the service of
process on a party to an action shall apply to the service of
process on his recognized agent.
Appointment of 27.
registered Attorney.
(1) The appointment of a registered attorney to make any
[3, 8 of 2017]
[4, 43 of 2024] appearance or application, or to do any act as aforesaid,
shall:-
(a) be substantially in such form specified in Form
No. 7 of the First Schedule to this Code and shall
be filed in court;
[4, 43 of (b) contain an address at which service of any
2024]
process under the provisions of this Chapter may
be served on such registered attorney, instead of
the party whom he represents;
[4, 43 of (c) include an electronic mail address and a
2024]
mobile phone number to which service of any
process, notice or any other legal documents
may also be served on a registered attorney;
[4, 43 of (d) contain a memorandum substantially in the
2024]
Form No. 16A of the First Schedule in duplicate
setting out the address, mobile phone number
and the electronic mail address, if any, of such
party which shall be considered as the registered
address, the registered mobile phone number
and the registered electronic mail address,
respectively of such party. The registered
attorney shall with such memorandum tender to
the Registrar stamps to the value required to
cover cost of service of such notices or other
legal document by registered post and the
registered attorney shall bear the cost of courier
service or service through electronic means;
(2)
(a) Where a party who appoints a registered
Attorney is a natural person, a memorandum
nominating a legal representative for the purpose
of the legal proceedings in the event of the death
of such party before the final determination of the
proceedings, shall also submitted.
(b) The memorandum referred to above shall,
substantially be in the form specified in Form
No.7A of the First Schedule hereto.
(c) The provisions of section 393 shall apply in
regard to the nomination of such legal
representatives and filing of such memorandum.
[4, 43 of 2024] (2A)
(a) Where a party is represented by a registered
attorney, such attorney shall in the appointment,
state the national identity card number, passport
number or any other mode of identification, as the
case may be, of the party and shall also make an
endorsement thereon certifying the identity of
such party. Where the party is a company or a
body corporate the appointment shall be made
under the seal of such company or a body
corporate as the case may be.
(b) In the event a person who resides outside Sri
Lanka is unable to meet his registered attorney to
sign the appointment under subsection (1), such
appointment shall be signed in the presence of
any of the following authorized persons who shall
certify the identity of such person: -
(i) an Attorney-at-Law, a solicitor, a lawyer
or a Notary of the country where such
party resides; or
(ii) the High Commissioner, the
Ambassador, a diplomatic officer or a
consular officer of the Sri Lankan High
Commission, Embassy or Consular Office
in the country in which such party
resides.
(c) In the case of any delay or any difficulty to
produce the original of the appointment within the
specified time, a copy of the original in electronic
form may be produced in court subject to
production of the original of such appointment
within a reasonable time as the court may
direct.".
(3) When an appointment under subsection (1) is filed, an
appointment of a registered attorney shall be in force until -
(a) revoked by the client in writing with the leave
of the court and after notice to the registered
attorney in writing signed by the client and filed in
court;
(b) revoked by the registered attorney-
(i) in writing signed by the client and filed
in Court;
(ii) with leave of the court having given
thirty days’ notice to the client;
(c) the client dies;
(d) the death or incapacity of registered attorney;
or
(e) all proceedings in the action are ended and
judgment satisfied so far as regards the client.
(4) No Counsel shall be required to present any document
empowering him to make any appearance or application or
to do any act. The Attorney-General may appoint a
registered attorney to act specially in any particular case or
to act generally on behalf of the State.
Death or incapacity 28. If any such registered attorney as in the last preceding section is
Of registered
attorney. mentioned shall die, or be removed or suspended, or otherwise
become incapable to act as aforesaid, at any time before judgment, no
further proceeding shall be taken in the action against the party for
whom he appeared until thirty days after notice to appoint another
registered attorney has been given to that party either personally or in
such other manner as the court directs.
Service on 29.
registered attorney.
[4, 8 of 2017] [4, 8 of 2017] (1) Any process served on the registered attorney of any
party or left at the office or ordinary residence of such
registered attorney, relative to an action or appeal, except
where the same is for the personal appearance of the
party, shall be presumed to be duly communicated and
made known to the party whom the registered attorney
represents; and, unless the court otherwise directs, shall
be as effectual for all purposes in relation to the action or
appeal as if the same had been given to, or served on, the
party in person.
(2) Service of any process, notice or any other document at
the address given under paragraph (b) of subsection (1) of
section 27 and sent to the electronic mail address given
under paragraph (c) of subsection (1) of section 27 shall be
deemed to be sufficient delivery to the party who has
appointed the registered attorney, unless the court
otherwise directs.
(3) Service of process, notice or any other document at the
address given in the memorandum submitted under
section 27(2) shall be deemed to be sufficient delivery to
the nominee or nominees appointed under section 393.
Agent to accept 30. Besides the recognized agents described in section 25, any
service.
person residing within the jurisdiction of the court may be appointed an
agent to accept service of process. Such appointment may be special
or general, and shall be made by an instrument in writing signed by
the principal, which shall contain an address at which such service
may be made, and which, or, if the appointment be general, a duly
attested copy thereof, shall be filed in court.
No appointment under this section shall be of any force or effect for
the purpose of enabling or authorizing process to be served on an
agent so appointed in any action to recover money due upon the
mortgage of immovable property.
Agent to accept 30A.
service in action
upon mortgage of (1) The mortgagor of any immovable property may make
immovable property. application for the registration of the address of any
[2,12 of 1973]
registered attorney or any person for the service of process
in any action upon the mortgage. The application shall be
made substantially in the form No. 11A in the First
Schedule.
(2) The address for service shall be registered in or in
continuation of the folio in which is registered the mortgage
of the immovable property.
(3) Where the applicant declares in his application that a
previously registered address is cancelled, the Registrar
shall make a new entry in the register and cancel the
registration of the previous address.
(4) The fee for registration of the address for service or for
a change of such address shall be fifty cents, with an
addition of ten cents for each folio after the first in which
the address is to be registered.
[Sections 31 and 32 repealed by Law No. 20 of 1977]
CHAPTER VI
OF THE SCOPE AND SUBJECT OF ACTION
Regular action how 33. Every regular action shall, as far as Regular action, practicable, be
to be framed.
so framed as to afford how to be ground for a final decision upon the
subjects framed, in dispute, and so to prevent further litigation
concerning them,
Every action shall 34.
include whole claim.
(1) Every action shall include the Every action whole of the
claim which the plaintiff is shall include entitled to make in
respect of the cause of w _e c aim-action; but a plaintiff
may relinquish any portion of his claim in order to bring the
action within the jurisdiction of any court.
(2) If a plaintiff omits to sue in respect of, or intentionally
relinquishes any portion of, his claim, he shall not
afterwards sue in respect of the portion so omitted or
relinquished. A person entitled to more than one remedy in
respect of the same cause of action may sue for all or any
of his remedies; but if he omits (except with the leave of
the court obtained before the hearing) to sue for any of
such remedies, he shall not afterwards sue for the remedy
so omitted.
(3) For the purpose of this section, an obligation and a
collateral security for its performance shall be deemed to
constitute but one cause of action.
Illustration
A lets a house to B at a yearly rent of Rs. 1000.
The rent for the whole of the two years 1886 and
1887 is due and unpaid. A sues B only for the rent
due for one of those years. A shall not afterwards
sue B for the rent due for the other year.
Joinder of claims in 35.
actions for
immovable property. (1) In an action for the recovery of immovable property, or
to obtain a declaration of title to immovable property, no
other claim, or any cause of action, shall be made unless
with the leave of the court, except
(a) claims in respect of mesne profits or arrears
of rent in respect of the property claimed;
(b) damages for breach of any contract under
which the property or any part thereof is held; or
consequential on the trespass which constitutes
the cause of action; and
(c) claims by a mortgagee to enforce any of his
remedies under the mortgage. Example. A sues B
to recover land upon the allegation that the land
belongs to C, and that he. A, has bought it of C. A
makes C a party defendant; but he cannot,
without leave of the court, join with this claim an
alternative claim for damages against C for non-
performance of his contract of sale.
In actions (2) No claim by or against an executor, administrator, or
against
heir, as such, shall in any action be joined with claims by or
executors, & c.
against him personally unless the last-mentioned claims
are alleged to arise with reference to the estate in respect
of which the plaintiff or defendant sues or is sued as
executor, administrator, or heir, or are such as he was
entitled to or liable for jointly with the deceased person
whom be represents.
In other cases. 36.
(1) Subject to the rules contained in the last section, the
plaintiff may unite in the same action several causes of
action against the same defendant or the same defendants
jointly, and any plaintiffs having causes of action in which
they are jointly interested against the same defendant or
defendants may unite such causes of action in the same
action.
Exception: courtBut if it appears to the court that an such causes of action
may order
cannot be conveniently tried or disposed of together, the
separation.
court may, at any time before the hearing, of its own motion
or on the application of any defendant, in both cases either
in the presence of, or upon notice to, the plaintiff, or at any
subsequent stage of the action if the parties agree, order
separate trials of any such causes of action to be had, or
make such other order as may be necessary or expedient
for the separate disposal thereof.
(2) When causes of action are united, the jurisdiction of the
court as regards the action shall depend on the amount or
value of the aggregate subject-matter at the date of
instituting the action, whether or not an order has been
made under the second paragraph of subsection (1).
Application by 37. Any defendant alleging that the plaintiff has united in the same
defendant in such
cases. action several causes of action, which cannot be conveniently
disposed of in one action, may at any time before the hearing apply to
the court for an order confining the action to such of the causes of
action as may be conveniently disposed of in one action.
Order of court 38.
thereon.
(1) If, on the hearing of such application, it appears to the
court that the causes of action are such as cannot all be
conveniently disposed of in one action, the court may order
any of such causes of action to be excluded, and may
direct the plaint to be amended accordingly, and may make
such order as to costs as may be just.
(2) Every amendment made under this section shall be
attested by the signature of the Judge.
CHAPTER VII
OF THE MODE OF INSTITUTION OF ACTION
Regular action to 39. Every action of regular procedure shall be instituted by presenting
commence by
plaint. a duly stamped written plaint to the court, or to such officer as the
[6,20 of 1977] court shall appoint in that behalf. The plaint shall be accompanied by
[3,79 of 1988]
such number of summonses in Form No, 16 in the First Schedule as
there are defendants, and a precept in Form" No. 17 of the said
Schedule.
Requisites of Plaint 40. The plaint shall be distinctly written upon good and suitable paper,
[7,20 of 1977]
and shall plaint contain the following particulars.
(a) the name of the court and date of filing the plaint;
(b) the name, description, and place of residence of the
plaintiff;
(c) the name, description, and the place of residence of the
defendant so far as the same can be ascertained;
(d) a plain and concise statement of the circumstances
constituting each cause of action, and where and when it
arose. Such statement shall be set forth in duly numbered
paragraphs; and where two or more causes of action are
set out, the statement of the circumstances constituting
each cause of action must be separate, and numbered;
(e) a demand of the relief which the plaintiff claims; and
(f) if the plaintiff has allowed a set-off or relinquished a
portion of his claim, the amount so allowed or relinquished,
If the plaintiff seeks the recovery of money, the plaint must state the
precise amount, so far as the case admits. In an action for a specific
chattel, or to establish, recover, or enforce any right, status, or
privilege, or for mesne profits, or for the amount which will be found
due to the plaintiff on taking unsettled accounts between him and the
defendant, the plaint need only state approximately the value of the
chattel, right, status, or privilege, or the amount sued for.
Land sued for to be 41. When the claim made in the action is for some specific portion of
described by metes
and bounds or land, or for some snare or interest in a specific portion of land, then
sketch. the portion of land must be described in the plaint so far as possible by
reference to physical metes and bounds, or by reference to a sufficient
sketch, map, or plan to be appended to the plaint, and not by name
only.
Plaintiff suing in a 42. When the plaintiff sues in a representative character, the plaint
representative
character must should show, not only that he has an actual existing interest in the
show that the subject-matter, but that he has taken the steps necessary to enable
character has
accrued to him. him to institute an action concerning it.
Illustrations
(a) A sues as B's executor. The plaint must state
that A has proved B's will.
(b) A sues as C's administrator- The plaint must
state that A has taken out administration to C's
estate.
Plaint must show 43. The plaint must show that the defendant is or claims to be
defendant's interest
and liability to be interested in the subject-matter, and that he is liable to be called upon
sued. to answer the plaintiffs demand.
Exemption from bar44. If the cause of action arose beyond the period ordinarily allowed
from lapse of time to
be shown. by any law for instituting the action, the plaint must show the ground
upon which exemption from such law is claimed.
Jurisdiction of court 45. Every plaint shall contain a statement of facts setting out the
to be averred.
jurisdiction of the court to try arid determine the claim in respect of
which the action is brought.
Subscription of 46.
plaint
(1) Every plaint presented by a registered attorney on
behalf of a plaintiff shall be subscribed by such registered
attorney. In every other case in which a plaint is presented,
it shall be subscribed by the plaintiff; and his signature
shall be verified by the signature of some officer authorized
by the court in that behalf.
Court may (2) Before the plaint (whether presented by the plaintiff or
refuse to
by a registered attorney in his behalf) is allowed to be filed,
entertain plaint.
the court may, if in its discretion it shall think fit, refuse to
entertain the same for any of the following reasons,
namely:
(a) if it does not state correctly, and without
prolixity, the several particulars hereinbefore
required to be specified therein;
(b) if it contains any particulars other than those
so required;
(c) if it is not subscribed, or subscribed and
verified, as the case may be, as hereinbefore
required;
(d) if it does not disclose a cause of action;
(e) if it is not framed in accordance with section
33;
(f) if it is wrongly framed by reason of non-joinder
or misjoinder of parties, or because the plaintiff
has joined causes of action which ought not to be
joined in the same action;
and may return the same for amendment then and there,
or within such time as may be fixed by the court, upon such
terms as to the payment of costs occasioned by the
amendment as the court thinks fit;
Provided that no amendment shall be allowed which would
have the effect of converting an action of one character
into an action of another and inconsistent character;
And may reject.And provided further, that in each of the following cases,
namely:-
(g) Where the relief sought is undervalued, and
the plaintiff, on being required by the court to
correct the valuation within a time to be fixed by
the court, fails to do so;
(h) Where the relief sought is properly valued, but
the plaint is written upon paper insufficiently
stamped, and the plaintiff on being required by
the court to supply the requisite stamps within a
time to be fixed by the court fails to do so;
(i) When the action appears from the statement in
the plaint to be barred by any positive rule of law;
[4,79 of 1988](j) When the plaint having been returned for
amendment within a time fixed by the court is not
amended within such time,
[4,79 of 1988](k) When the plaint is not accompanied by such
number of summonses as there are defendants,
the plaint shall be rejected; but such rejection shall not of
its own force preclude the plaintiff from presenting a fresh
plaint in respect of the same cause of action.
Where plaint 47. In every case where an action has been instituted in a court not
presented to wrong
court. having jurisdiction by reason of the amount or value involved, or by
reason of the conditions made necessary to the institution of an action
in any particular court by section 9 not being present, the plaint shall
be returned to be presented to the proper court.
Order on rejection 48. Every order returning or rejecting a plaint shall specify the date
of plaint.
when the plaint was presented and so returned or rejected, the name
of the person by whom it was presented and whether such person was
plaintiff or registered attorney, and the fault or defect constituting the
ground of return or rejection; and every such order shall be in writing
signed by the Judge, and filed of record.
Memorandum of 49.
documents to be
endorsed on plaint. (1) The plaintiff shall endorse on the plaint, or annex
[8,20 of 1977] thereto, a memorandum of the documents, if any, which he
has produced along with it; and if the plaint is admitted,
shall present as many copies on unstamped paper of the
plaint as there are defendants, translated into the language
of each defendant whose language is not the language of
the court; unless the court, by reason of the length of the
plaint or the number of the defendants or for any other
sufficient reason, permits him to present a like number of
concise statements of the nature of the claim made, or of
the relief or remedy required in the action, in which case he
shall present such statements.
(2) If the plaintiff sues or the defendant or any of the
defendants is sued in a representative capacity, such
statement shall show in what capacity such plaintiff or
defendant sues or is sued; and the plaintiff may by leave of
the court amend such statements so as to make them
correspond with the plaint.
Such memorandum and copies or statements shall be
examined by the Registrar of the court and signed by him if
he finds them correct.
Plaintiff to produce 50. If a plaintiff sues upon a document in his possession or power, he
with plaint
document sued on. shall produce it in court when the plaint is presented, and document
sued shall at the same time deliver the document on or a copy thereof
to be filed with the plaint.
To annex list of 51. If he relies on any other documents (whether in his possession or
other documents.
power or not) as evidence in support of his claim, he shall enter such
documents in a list to be added or annexed to the plaint.
And to state where 52. In the case of any such document not being in his possession or
document not in his
possession is. power, he shall, if possible, state in whose possession or power it is.
Action on lost 53. In the case of any action founded upon a bill of exchange,
negotiable
instrument. promissory note, cheque, or any negotiable instrument, if it be proved
that the instrument is lost, and if an indemnity be given by the plaintiff,
to the satisfaction of the court, against the claims of any other person
upon such instrument, the court may make such decree as it would
have made if the plaintiff had produced the instrument in court when
the plaint was presented, and had at the same time delivered a copy
of the instrument to be filed with the plaint.
Document not 54. A document which ought to be produced in court by the plaintiff
produced with plaint
inadmissible when the plaint is presented, or to be entered in the list to be added or
afterwards without annexed to the plaint, and which is not produced or entered
leave.
accordingly, shall not, without the leave of the court, be received in
[9,20 of 1977]
evidence on his behalf at the hearing of the action.
CHAPTER VIII
OF THE ISSUE AND SERVICE OF SUMMONS
Summons. 55.
[10,20 of 1977]
(1) Upon the plaint being filed and the copies of concise
[2,14 of 1997]
statements required by section 49 presented, the court
[5, 43 of 2024]
shall order summons in the form No. 16 in the First
Schedule to issue, signed by the Registrar of the court,
requiring the defendant to answer the plaint on or before a
day to be specified in the summons, such day, being a day
not later than three months from the date of the institution
of the action in court.
[5, 43 of 2024] (2)
(a) Every party to an action, not appearing by a
registered attorney, shall on or before the date
specified in the summons deliver to the Registrar
a memorandum substantially in the Form No. 16A
in the First Schedule in duplicate setting out the
address, mobile phone number and the electronic
mail address if any, which shall be considered as
the registered address, the registered mobile
phone number and the registered electronic mail
address respectively of such party for the service
of the notices or any other legal document
required to be served on such party under the
provisions of this Code unless otherwise
provided. Every party shall inform the Registrar
forthwith of any change in the address, the
mobile phone number or the electronic mail
address.
(b) Every party shall with such memorandum
tender to the Registrar stamps to the value
required to cover cost of service of such notices
or other legal document by registered post. He
shall bear the cost of courier service or service
through electronic means.
(3) Where a party appears by a registered attorney, the
address, the mobile phone number and the electronic mail
address of the registered attorney contained in his
appointment under section 27 shall be deemed to be the
registered address, the registered mobile phone number
and the registered electronic mail address of such
Attorney-at-Law so long as the appointment is in force.
(4) Any notice or other legal document required to be
served on any party shall be deemed sufficient service if
served by registered post or courier service or through
electronic means-
(i) on such party on the registered address, the
registered mobile phone number or the registered
electronic mail address of such party; or
(ii) on such registered attorney, where a party
appears by a registered attorney and such
appointment is in force, on the registered
address, the registered mobile phone number
and the registered electronic mail address of
such registered attorney.
(5) The Registrar shall file one copy of the memorandum
substantially in the Form No. 16A furnished to him as part
of the record of the case and keep and maintain the other
copy by way of a separate ledger.
[Sections 56,57 and 58 is repealed by Law No. 20 of 1977]
SERVICE
Service of summons59.
[6, 43 of 2024]
(1)
(a) Summons shall ordinarily be served by the
process server, registered post or courier service.
(b) Where the plaintiff wishes summons may also
be served through electronic mail, all necessary
documents shall be submitted by the plaintiff to
the relevant court in electronic form.
(2) In the case of a company or a body corporate summons
may be delivered by the process server, registered post,
courier service or electronic mail if any to the registered
office or to the principal place of business of such company
or body corporate.
(3) Where the defendant is a public officer, the court may
send summons by the process server, registered post or
courier service to the head of the department in which the
defendant is employed, and it shall be the duty of such
head of department to cause the summons to be served
personally on the defendant.
(4) Where the court is prima facie satisfied that the
defendant is in the employment of another person, the
court may send the summons by the process server,
registered post or courier service to the employer at his
place of business or, where the employer is a company or
a body corporate, to any secretary, manager or other like
officer of the company or the body corporate, and it shall
be the duty of such employer or officer, as the case may
be, to cause the summons to be served personally on the
defendant.
(5) Where a defendant appears in court in person on
summons being served on him in the manner referred to
above, he shall produce the national identity card or
passport or any other mode of identification as the court
may deem fit.
(6) In this section-
" head of department "-
(a) when used with reference to a
member of any unit of the Sri Lanka
Army, Navy or Air Force, means the
Commanding Officer of that unit;
(b) when used with reference to a person
employed in a local authority, where the
local authority is a Municipal Council,
means the Municipal Commissioner of
that Council and where the local authority
is an Urban Council or a Pradeshiya
Sabha, means the Chairman or the
Secretary of that Council or Sabha;
(c) when used with reference to any other
public officer means the head of the
department of Government in which such
person is employed; and
"national identity card" means the identity card
issued to such person under the Registration of
Persons Act, No. 32 of 1968.".
Service by the 60.
process server
(1)
[7, 43 of 2024]
(a) Where the summons are served by the
process server, the summons shall be
accompanied by a precept in the Form No. 17 of
the First Schedule.
(b)
(i) The process server may, upon the
summons being served on the defendant,
obtain the signature or the thumb
impression of such defendant on the
precept as acknowledgment of the
service of summons.
(ii) The process server shall return the
precept to the court, together with a
report setting out the manner in which the
summons was served on the defendant
containing particulars relating to the
identity of the person, date, time and
place the summons were served. The
report shall also state whether defendant,
placed or refused to place his signature
or thumb impression, on the precept as
acknowledgment of the service of
summons.
(iii) The refusal by any defendant to place
the signature or thumb impression, as the
case may be, on the precept shall not be
considered as an invalidation of the
service of summons.
(2) If the service referred to in the preceding provisions of
this section cannot by the exercise of due diligence be
effected, the court may having obtained an affidavit from
the plaintiff stating that to the best of his knowledge the
defendant resides in the captioned address and not living
outside Sri Lanka, order the process server to affix the
summons at some conspicuous part of the house in which
the defendant ordinarily resides or in the case of a
company or a body corporate, at the registered office or at
the usual place of business or office of such company or a
body corporate and in every such case the summons shall
be deemed to have been duly served on the defendant.
(3) The Court may authorise the process server to serve
the summons outside the local limits of the court as
directed by the court.
(4) Where it is reported by the process server that the
summons could not be affected personally on the
defendant on the last known address given by the plaintiff
and the plaintiff informs Court by filling affidavit that the
plaintiff is unaware of the place where the defendant
resides, the court upon being satisfied on the contents of
such affidavit, order that the summons be served by way of
publication in newspapers in all three languages as the
court may in each case direct.
(5) For the purpose of this chapter-
"process server" means a fiscal, a deputy fiscal,
an officer authorized by the Judge or Registrar of
the court to serve documents of the court within
the local limits or outside the local limits of the
court as directed by the court, or the Grama
Niladhari within whose division the defendant
resides.".
Proof of service 61. When summons are served by-
[8, 43 of 2024]
(a) registered post or courier service, the registered post
article receipt or proof of delivery of courier service;
(b) electronic mail, the proof of sending of the electronic
mail by the Registrar and filed as part of the case record;
(c) publication in newspapers, copies of such publications;
or
(d) in any other manner, an affidavit of such service,
shall be sufficient evidence of the service of the summons and of the
date of such service, and shall be admissible in evidence and the
statements contained therein shall be deemed to be correct unless
and until the contrary is proved.
Substituted service.62. Whenever service is substituted by order of the court, the court
[12,20 of 1977]
shall fix a day, not being a day later than three months from the day on
[4,14 of 1997]
which the defendant was earlier required to answer the plaint, on or
before which the defendant shall file his answer and comply with the
other requirements of section 55.
When more 63. When there are more defendants when more than one, service of
defendants than
one, service on the summons shall be defendants made on each defendant.
each.
Agents to accept 64. When a defendant has an appointed under section 30 empowered
service; partners
and manager. to accept service, service of summons on such agent shall be
sufficient. And in the case of an action against partners relative to a
partnership transaction, or to an actionable wrong in respect of which
relief is claimable from the partners, as a firm, each partner is an
agent so empowered of each other partner, as is also the person (if
any) not being a partner, who has the management of the business of
the partnership at the principal place of such business within the local
limits of the court's ordinary jurisdiction.
Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be deemed to
authorize summons in an action to recover moneys due on a
mortgage of immovable property to be served on any agent appointed
under section 30.
Service on agent in 64A. Where the mortgagor has registered the address of an agent
mortgage action.
under section 30A, service of summons may be made on such agent
and shall be sufficient.
When defendant out65. In an action relating to any business or work against a person who
of jurisdiction has
manager within it. does not reside within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the court
from which the summons issued, service on any manager or agent
who at the time of the service personally carries on such business or
work for such person within such limits shall be deemed good service;
and for the purpose of this section the master of a ship is the agent of
his owner or charterer.
Service on agent or 66. In an action to obtain relief or compensation for wrong in respect
affixing on
immovable property.of an immovable property or connected thereto, if the service cannot
[9, 43 of 2024]
be made on the defendant in person, it may be made on any agent of
the defendant in charge of the property and in cases where such
agent cannot be found the court may direct that the summons shall be
affixed at some conspicuous part of such property.
Misdescription not 67. No misnomer or misdescription of any person or place in any such
to vitiate summons,
& c. summons, order, or process shall vitiate the same, provided that the
person or place be therein described as he or it is commonly known,
and provided that such misnomer or misdescription be not such as to
mislead the party served therewith.
Service on 68.
defendant in jail
(1) If the defendant be in jail, the summons shall be
[10, 43 of 2024]
delivered by the process server to the officer in charge of
the jail in which the defendant is confined, and such officer
shall cause the summons to be served personally on the
defendant and obtain an acknowledgement of receipt of
the summons by the defendant.
(2) The precept shall be returned through the process
server to the court from which it is issued, with a statement
of the service endorsed thereon, and signed by the officer
in charge of the jail.
(3) Where any defendant is in prison on the summons
returnable date the officer in charge of the prison shall
produce the defendant to the Court .
Service out of Sri 69. Service of a summons out of Sri Lanka may be allowed by the
Lanka. Application
for, how made. court in all cases in which the court has jurisdiction. Every application
for an order for leave to serve such summons on a defendant out of
Sri Lanka shall be by motion and shall be supported by evidence (by
affidavit or otherwise) showing in what place or country such
defendant is or may probably be found, and the grounds on which the
application is made.
Order granting 70. Every order granting leave to effect service of summons out of Sri
leave for service of
summons out of Sri Lanka shall direct the mode by which such service shall be effected,
Lanka. and also direct that the defendant shall on or before the date specified
[6,79 of 1988]
in the summons, such date being a date not later than six months from
[11, 43 of 2024]
the date of the order for service outside Sri Lanka, file his answer and
comply with the other requirements of section 55. Such service can be
effected by courier service or by any legal firm authorised by the laws
of such country where the defendant resides and the proof of personal
service of summons shall be submitted to the court.
Communication of 71. A summons under sections 69 and 70 shall be in the form No. 18
Orders
in the First Schedule.
CHAPTER VIIIA
SERVICE OF ORDERS
Communication of 71A. The Court may, in addition to the service of documents, direct
Orders
the Registrar to communicate any order of court including an enjoining
[12, 43 of 2024]
order, an injunction, an interim injunction, a sequestration order and an
interim order to the parties concerned by way of electronic or
telephone devices.
CHAPTER IX
OF FILING ANSWER
Judgment against 72. If the defendant admits the claim of the plaintiff, the court shall
defendant if he
admits claim of the give judgment against the defendant according to the admission so
plaintiff. made. Such admission shall be in writing, signed by the defendant and
[15,20 of 1977]
his signature attested by an attorney-at-law.
Answer to be in 73. If the defendant does not admit the plaintiffs claim, he shall
writing.
himself, or his registered attorney shall on his behalf, deliver to the
[15,20 of 1977]
court a duly stamped written answer.
[Section 74 is repealed by Law No. 20 of 1977]
Requisites of 75. Every such answer shall be distinctly written upon good and
answer.
suitable paper, shall be duly stamped, shall be subscribed by the
[17,20 of 1977]
defendant or his duly 1977] constituted representative as in the case
of a plaint is provided for the plaintiffs subscription, or if he is
represented by a registered attorney, by such registered attorney, and
shall contain the following particulars:-
(a) the name of the court, the number of the case, and the
date of filing the answer;
(b) the name of the plaintiff;
(c) the name, description, and residence of the defendant;
(d) a statement admitting or denying the several averments
of the plaint, and setting out in detail plainly and concisely
the matters of fact and law, and the circumstances of the
case upon which the defendant means to rely for his
defence; this statement shall be drawn in duly numbered
paragraphs, referring by number, where necessary, to the
paragraphs of the plaint;
(e) when the defendant sets up a claim in reconvention the
answer must contain a plain and concise statement of the
facts constituting the ground of such claim which the
defendant makes in reconvention. A claim in reconvention
duly set up in the answer shall have the same effect as a
plaint in a cross action so as to enable the court to
pronounce a final judgment in the same action both on the
original and on the cross claim; but it shall not affect the
lien upon the amount decreed of any registered attorney in
respect of the costs payable to him under the decree.
Jurisdiction of court 76. If the defendant intends to dispute the averment in the plaint as to
to be specially
traversed. the jurisdiction of the court, he must do so by a separate and distinct
plea, expressly traversing such averment.
Rejection and 77. If any answer is substantially defective in any of the particulars
amendment of
answer. hereinbefore defined, or is argumentative or prolix, or contains matter
[7,79 of 1988] irrelevant to the action, the court may, by an order to be endorsed
thereon, reject the same or return it to the party by whom it was made,
for amendment within a period not exceeding one month from the date
on which the answer was so returned, and the court may impose such
terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit.
If the answer is rejected or left unamended as ordered, the defendant
shall be regarded as having failed to file answer.
The order so endorsed shall specify the ground of the rejection.
Copy of answer to 78. A copy of the answer shall be served on the plaintiff, or each of the
be delivered to
plaintiff or his plaintiffs, if more than one, or his or their registered attorney.
registered attorney.
[18,20 of 1977]
CHAPTER X
OF THE REPLICATION AND FURTHER
PLEADINGS
When replication 79. Except in the case of a claim by a defendant in reconvention no
may be allowed.
pleading after answer shall be filed except by order of court on special
[19,20 of 1977]
motion to be made after due notice to the other side, and before the
day appointed for the hearing of the action, upon such terms as to
costs and the postponement of the hearing of the action as the court
shall think fit. Such order shall not be made (except in the case of a
claim in reconvention on the part of the defendant) unless the court is
satisfied on such motion that the real issues between the parties
cannot be conveniently raised without such further pleading. All
pleadings after answer shall be subject to the rules prescribed by
section 75 relative to the form and substance of the answer, so far as
the same can be made applicable, and copies of such pleadings shall
be served on the opposite party or his registered attorney.
CHAPTER XA
FIXING DAY OF PRE-TRIAL CONFERENCE
Date for pre-trial 79A. The court shall-
conference order
(a) upon the filing of the answer; or
[5, 8 of 2017]
[5, 29 of 2023]
(b) where a replication is permitted, on the last day of the
period of time allowed for the filing of the replication,
whether such replication is filed or not,
appoint a date not less than three months and not exceeding five
months from such date, for pre-trial conference to be commenced,
either in the presence of all parties to the action or such parties as are
present.
CHAPTER XB
PRE-TRIAL STEPS TO BE TAKEN BEFORE THE
PRE-TRIAL CONFERENCE
Pre- trial steps to be79B. The parties shall, in addition to any other pre-trial step that may
taken before the
date fixed for the be taken by such parties before the case is fixed for pre-trial
pre-trial conference conference, tender -
(a) their proposed admissions and issues of fact and law in
writing;
(b)
(i) lists of witnesses to be called by such parties
at the trial; and
(ii) lists of documents relied upon by such parties
and to be produced at the trial;
(c) copies of documents listed in the lists of documents
which are in the possession of or under the control of such
parties,
to the registry of the court, not less than thirty days before the date
first fixed for the pre-trial conference and after giving notice to all other
parties with proof of service thereof.
Tendering of 79C.
documents in
electronic form (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
the Evidence (Special Provisions) Act, No. 14 of 1995,
Electronic Transactions Act, No. 19 of 2006 or any other
written law, where any party proposes to tender any
document in electronic form, the provisions of this section
shall apply in relation to the tendering of such documents.
(2) Any party proposing to tender documents in electronic
form shall, not less than thirty days before the date first
fixed for pre-trial conference, file in court, after giving notice
to the opposing party or parties -
(a) the list of such documents in electronic form
together with an index thereof; and
(b) a copy or copies of such documents as is
sufficient to enable the party to understand the
nature of such evidence.
(3) Any party to whom a notice has been given under
subsection (2) may, within fifteen days of the receipt of
such notice apply for permission from the party giving such
notice, to access and inspect -
(a) the documents in electronic form, sought to be
tendered in court under subsection (2);
(b) the machine, device, computer or information
system, as the case may be, used to produce,
reproduce, generate, create, send, receive, store,
display, communicate or process the documents
in electronic form referred to in paragraph (a);
and
(c) any records relating to the production,
reproduction, generation, creation, sending,
receipt, storage, display, communication or
processing of the documents referred to in
paragraph (a).
(4) Upon receipt of an application for permission to access
and inspection under subsection (3), the party proposing to
tender such documents in electronic form shall, within
reasonable time, but not later than fifteen days after the
receipt of such application, provide a reasonable
opportunity to the party applying or his agents or
nominees, to have access to, and inspect such documents
in electronic form, machine, device, computer, information
system or records referred to in the application.
(5) Where -
(a) the party proposing to tender documents in
electronic form is unable to give permission or
does not give permission for access and
inspection as applied for under subsection (3); or
(b) the parties are unable to agree on any matter
relating to -
(i) the notice given under subsection (2);
or
(ii) an application for access and
inspection made under subsection (3) or
the manner and extent of such access
and inspection,
the court may on application made by either party, make
such order or give such direction, as the interest of the
justice may require.
(6) The time period referred to in subsection (3) or (4) may
be extended at the discretion of the court, based on the
special circumstances of each case.
(7) Where any party proposing to tender any document in
electronic form under this section -
(a) fails to give notice under subsection (2);
(b) upon application being made for access and
inspection under subsection (3), fails to provide a
reasonable opportunity therefor; or
(c) fails to comply with any order or direction
given by court under subsection (5),
such party shall not be permitted to tender such documents
in electronic form, in respect of which the failure was
occasioned:
Provided however, the steps or applications referred to in
this Chapter shall be followed prior to the conclusion of the
pre-trial conference.
(8) Where any party objects to the admissibility of any
document in electronic form tendered under this section,
such party shall file in court, objections with reasons
therefor in writing with copies to all other parties, either
before the pre trial conference or at the pre trial
conference, as the case may be.
(9) Where any party files objections under subsection (8),
the court shall hear the parties to ascertain whether the
parties can admit such documents in electronic form, and
where no such admission is recorded, the court shall make
an appropriate pre-trial order under section 142B with
regard to the admissibility of such documents at the pre-
trial conference.
CHAPTER XI
OF FIXING DAY OF TRIAL
Fixing the case for 80.
trial
(1) After the issues are settled and the Judge conducting
[7, 29 of 2023]
the pre-trial conference is satisfied that the case is ready
for trial, the Judge shall forthwith appoint a date not later
than fourteen days from the date of the conclusion of the
pre-trial conference for the case to be called in order to fix
a date for the trial, in the trial court.
(2) The trial shall be conducted by a Judge appointed for
such purpose, other than the Judge who conducted the
pre-trial conference:
Provided that, where a Judge has not been separately
appointed to conduct the pre-trial conference, the Judge
who has been appointed for such court shall conduct both
pre-trial conference and the trial of such action.
(3) The Judge who is fixing the case for trial may, in any
appropriate case, fix several dates for trial.
80A. Repealed by [§8, 29 of 2023]
A reasonable 81. The court shall, in fixing the day of hearing, be careful not to
number of cases to
be fixed for each appoint more cases for one day than there is a probability of the court
day. getting through on that day.
Postponement. 82. When any case is in its turn called on for hearing upon the day
appointed there for, the court may, for sufficient cause to be specified
in its written order, direct that the hearing be postponed to a day which
shall be fixed in the order, upon such terms as to costs or otherwise as
the court shall think fit;
Provided that the court may in its discretion take and deal with a case
out of its order in the cause list on any day for good reason to be
adjudicated upon and recorded by the court before entering upon the
case.
Un disposed of 83.
cases to be placed
at the head of the (1) The cases in any day's cause list not disposed of on
roll. that day, by reason of want of time, will be placed at the
head of the next court-day's cause list, unless the Judge
directs otherwise.
[21,20 of 1977] (2) As soon as the cause list for any day is prepared,
legibly-written copies of it in the language of the court and
the language or languages of the parties shall be placed in
some fit and conspicuous place outside the court-house,
so that the suitors and all others interested may be enabled
readily to be informed of the contents of the same.
CHAPTER XII
OF THE CONSEQUENCES AND CURE (WHEN
PERMISSIBLE) OF DEFAULT IN PLEADING OR
APPEARING
Default of 84. If the defendant fails to file his answer on or before the day fixed
defendant.
for the filing of the answer, or on or before the day fixed for the
[23,20 of 1977]
subsequent filing of the answer or having filed his answer, if he fails to
appear on the day fixed (or the hearing of the action, and if the court is
satisfied that the defendant has been duly served with summons, or
has received due notice of the day fixed for the subsequent filing of
the answer, or of the day fixed for the hearing of the action, as the
case may be, and if, on the occasion of such default of the defendant,
the plaintiff appears, then the court shall proceed to hear the case ex
pane forthwith, or on such other day as the court may fix.
Procedure in ex 85.
parte trial.
(1) The plaintiff may place evidence before the court in
[23,20 of 1977]
support of his claim by affidavit, or by oral testimony and
move for judgment, and the court, if 1977] satisfied that the
plaintiff is entitled to the relief claimed by him, either in its
entirety or subject to modification, may enter such
judgment in favour of the plaintiff as to it shall seem proper,
and enter decree accordingly.
(2) Where the court is of opinion that the entirety of the
relief claimed by the plaintiff cannot be granted, the court
shall hear the plaintiff before modifying the relief claimed.
(3) Where there are several defendants of whom one or
more file answer and another or others of whom fail to file
answer, the plaintiff may move for judgment against such
of the defendants as may be in default without prejudice to
his right to proceed with the action against such of the
defendants as may have filed answer. The provisions of
this subsection shall apply notwithstanding that the
defendants are jointly liable upon a bill of exchange,
promissory note or cheque.
(4) The court shall cause a copy of the decree entered
under this section to be served on the defendant in the
manner prescribed for the service of summons. Such copy
of the decree shall bear an endorsement that any
application to set aside the decree under subsection (2) of
section 86 shall be made to court within fourteen days of
such service.
If defendant 86.
excuses his default,
any order or [13, 43 of 2024] (2) Where,
judgment to be set (a) at anytime after the case is fixed for ex-parte
aside.
trial against the defendant for default; or
[23,20 of 1977]
[ [3, 53 of 1980]
[13, 43 of 2024]
(b) any time after the decree is entered against
him for default but without the service of the
decree on him; or
(c) within fourteen days of the service of the
decree entered against him for default,
the defendant, with notice to the plaintiff makes application
to and thereafter satisfies court, that he did not receive the
summons or that he had reasonable grounds for such
default, the court shall set aside the order fixing the case
for ex-parte trial, the judgement and decree as the case
may be and permit the defendant to proceed with his
defence as from the stage of default upon such terms as to
costs or otherwise as to the court shall deem fit.
[3, 53 of 1980] (2A) At any time prior to the entering of judgment against a
defendant for default, the court may, if the plaintiff
consents, but not otherwise, set aside any order made on
the basis of the default of the defendant and permit him to
proceed with his defence as from the stage of default upon
such terms as to costs or otherwise as to the court shall
appear fit.
(3) Every application under this section shall be made by
petition supported by affidavit.
Non-appearance of 87.
Plaintiff.
(1) Where the plaintiff or where both the plaintiff and the
[23,20 of 1977]
defendant make default in appearing on the day fixed for
the trial, the court shall dismiss the plaintiff's action.
(2) Where an action has been dismissed under this
section, the plaintiff shall be precluded from bringing a
fresh action in respect of the same cause of action.
(3) The plaintiff may apply within a reasonable time from
the date of dismissal, by way of petition supported by
affidavit, to have the dismissal set aside, and if on the
hearing of such application, of which the defendant shall be
given notice, the court is satisfied that there were
reasonable grounds for the non-appearance of the plaintiff,
the court shall make order setting aside the dismissal upon
such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit, and
shall appoint a day for proceeding with the action as from
the stage at which the dismissal for default was made.
No appeal against 88.
Judgment for
default but order (1) No appeal shall lie against any judgment entered upon
setting aside or default.
refusing to set aside
judgment
appealable.
[23, 20 of 1977] [2, 5 of 2022] (2) The order setting aside or refusing to set aside the
[2, 5 of 2022] judgment entered upon default shall accompany the facts
upon which it is adjudicated and specify the grounds upon
which it is made, and shall be liable to an appeal to the
relevant High Court established by Article 154P of the
Constitution, with leave first had and obtained from such
High Court.
[4, 53 of 1980] (3) The provisions of sections 761 and 763 shall, mutatis
mutandis, apply to and in relation to the execution of a
decree entered upon default, where an order refusing to
set aside such decree has been made.
Where two or more 89. In the case of an action against two or more defendants alleged to
defendants
severally liable. be severally liable, where a summons is served upon any of them, the
plaintiff may proceed against the person or persons served as if no
other defendant were named in the summons. Where it is served upon
all of them, the plaintiff may take judgment against one or more of
them, where he would be entitled to judgment if the action was against
him or them alone. Where judgment is so taken the plaintiff may
proceed in the same action against the other defendants.
One of many 90. In the case of an action where there are more defendants than
defendants
appearing, no one, the court shall not be obliged to pass a decree for default against
decree for default a defendant for failing to appear at a stage of the action, provided that
need be passed
against others. one defendant at least appears at that stage against whom the action
must proceed,
CHAPTER XIII
OF MOTIONS
Motions. 91. Every application made to the court in the course of an action,
[23,20 of 1977]
incidental thereto, and not a step in the regular procedure, shall be
made by motion by the applicant in person or his counsel or registered
attorney, and a memorandum in writing of such motion shall be at the
same time delivered to the court.
Postponements, 91A.
adjournments and
extensions of time. (1) Where a day is fixed or time appointed for doing any act
[25,20 of 1977] or taking any proceeding by a party to the action, the court
may, from time to time, upon the motion of such party and,
if sufficient cause is shown, fix another day or enlarge or
abridge the time appointed, upon such terms, if any, as to it
may seem proper.
(2) The day may be refixed or the time enlarged although
the application for the same is not made until after the
expiration of the day or time fixed or appointed.
(3) The court may, for sufficient cause, either on the
application of the parties or of its own motion, advance,
postpone or adjourn the trial to any other date upon such
terms as to costs or otherwise as to it shall seem proper.
(4) Where a date is fixed on or before which an act has to
be done by a party to the action or a return has to be made
to a commission issued by the court, the case shall be
called in open court on such date for the purpose of
making an appropriate order in connection therewith or
relating thereto.
CHAPTER XIV
OF THE JOURNAL
Journal. 92. With the institution of the action the court shall commence a
journal entitled as of the action, in which shall be minuted, as they
occur, all the events in the course of the action, i.e., the original
application, and every subsequent step, proceeding, and order; each
minute shall be signed and dated by the Judge, and the journal so
kept shall be the principal record of the action.
CHAPTER XV
OF AMENDMENT
Amendments of 93.
pleadings.
[9,79 of 1988] [8, 8 of 2017] (1) Upon application made to it before the day first fixed for
[3,9 of 1991] [9, 29 of 2023] pre-trial conference of the action, in the presence of, or
[8, 8 of 2017] after reasonable notice to all the parties to the action, the
[9, 29 of 2023]
Court shall have full power of amending in its discretion, all
pleadings in the action, by way of addition, or alteration, or
of omission.
[8, 8 of 2017] (2) On or after the day first fixed for pre-trial conference, of
[9, 29 of 2023] the action and before final judgement, no application for
the amendment of any pleadings shall be allowed unless
the Court is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded by the
Court, that grave and irremediable injustice will be caused
if such amendment is not permitted, and on no other
ground, and that the party so applying has not been guilty
of laches.
(3) Any application for amendment of pleadings which may
be allowed by the Court under subsection (1) or (2) shall
be upon such terms as to costs and postponement or
otherwise as the Court may think fit.
(4) The additions or alterations or omissions shall be
clearly made on the face of the pleading affected by the
Order ;or if this cannot conveniently be done, a fair copy of
the pleading as altered shall, be appended in the record of
the action to the pleading amended. Every such addition or
alteration or omission shall be signed by the Judge.
CHAPTER XVI
OF DISCOVERY, INSPECTION, PRODUCTION,
IMPOUNDING, AND RETURN OF DOCUMENTS
Interrogatories. 94.
[10, 29 of 2023]
[10, 29 of 2023] (1) Any party may, fifteen days before the date first fixed for
the pre-trial conference, by leave of the court to be
obtained on motion ex parte, deliver through the court
interrogatories in writing for the examination of the opposite
party, or, where there are more opposite parties than one,
any one or more of such parties, with a note at the foot
thereof stating which of such interrogatories each of such
persons is required to answer:
Provided that no party shall deliver more than one set of
interrogatories to the same person without the permission
of the court, and that no defendant shall deliver
interrogatories for the examination of the plaintiff unless
such defendant has previously tendered his answer, and
such answer has been received and placed on the record.
(2) For the purposes of this Chapter, " opposite party ",
means a party between whom and the party interrogating
an issue has been raised.
Service of 95. Interrogatories delivered under the last section shall be served on
interrogatories.
the registered attorney (if any) of the party interrogated, or in the
manner hereinbefore provided for the service of summons, and the
provisions herein contained with regard to service of summons shall,
in the latter case, apply, so far as may be practicable.
Cost of 96. The court, in adjusting the costs of the action, shall at the instance
unreasonable
interrogatories to beof any party, inquire, or cause inquiry to be made, into the propriety of
borne by party in delivering such interrogatories; and if it thinks that such interrogatories
fault.
have been delivered unreasonably, exatiously, or at improper length,
the costs occasioned by the said interrogatories, and the answers
thereto, shall be borne by the party in fault.
Interrogatories to 97. If any party to an action is a body corporate or a company,
company, & c.
whether incorporated or not, or any other body of persons empowered
by law to sue or be sued, whether in its own name or in the name of
any officer or other person, any opposite party may apply to the court
for an order allowing him to deliver interrogatories to any member or
officer of such corporation, company, or body, and an order may be
made accordingly.
When party may 98. Any party called upon to answer interrogatories, whether by
refuse to answer.
himself or by any such member or officer, may refuse to answer any
interrogatory on the ground that it is scandalous or irrelevant, or is not
put bona fide for the purposes of the action, or that the answer will
tend to criminate himself, or that the matter inquired after is not
sufficiently material at that stage of the action, or on any other like
ground.
To be answered by 99. Interrogatories shall be answered by affidavit to be filed in court
affidavit.
within ten days from the service thereof, or within such further time as
the court may allow.
Application for 100. If any person interrogated omits or refuses to answer or answers
further answer.
insufficiently any interrogatory, the party interrogating may apply to the
court for an order requiring him to answer or to answer further, as the
case may be. And an order may be made requiring him to answer or to
answer further, either by an affidavit or by viva voce examination, as
the court may direct:
Provided that the court shall not require an answer to an interrogatory
which in its opinion need not have been answered under section 98.
Notice to admit 101.
genuineness of
Documents [11, 29 of 2023] (1) Either party may, by a notice issued by order of court, to
[11, 29 of 2023] be obtained on motion ex-parte not less than fifteen days
before the date first fixed for the pre-trial conference,
require the other party to admit (saving ail just exceptions
to the admissibility of such document in evidence) the
genuineness of any document material to the action.
(2) The admission shall also be made in writing, signed by
the other party or his registered attorney, and filed in court.
(3) If such notice be not given, no costs of proving such
document shall be allowed, unless the court otherwise
orders.
(4) If such notice is not complied with within four days after
its being served, and the court thinks it reasonable that the
admission should have been made, the party refusing shall
bear the expense of proving such document, whatever may
be the result of the action.
Order for discovery 102.
of documents.
[12, 29 of 2023] [12, 29 of 2023] (1) The court may, at any time during the pendency therein
of any action, order any party to the action to declare by
affidavit all the documents which are or have been in his
possession or power relating to any matter in question in
the action, and any parties to the action may, fifteen days
before the date first fixed for the pre-trial conference, apply
to the court for a like order.
(2) Every affidavit made under this section shall specify
which, if any, of the documents therein mentioned the
declarant objects to produce, together with the grounds of
such objection.
Orders for 103.
preservation,
disclosure or (1) The court may, at any time during the pendency therein
production of of any action, order the production or preservation by any
documents or
documents in party thereto or such of the documents in his possession or
electronic form. power relating to any matter in question in such action or
[13, 29 of 2023]
proceeding as the court thinks right; and the court may
deal with such documents when produced or preserved in
such manner as appears just.
(2) A party intending to institute any proceeding before
court may, prior to the institution of such proceedings,
make an application ex parte, by way of petition supported
by an affidavit, for an order to be made requiring a person
or entity having possession of any document in electronic
form, who shall be made the respondent in such
application, to preserve, disclose or produce such
document, as may be specified in such order.
(3) The court may, upon the receipt of an application under
subsection (2), make an order as prayed for in such
application, if –
(a) the person or entity against whom an order is
sought is likely to be a party to the proceeding to
be instituted subsequently;
(b) the applicant is also likely to be a party to
such proceeding to be instituted subsequently;
(c) the document in electronic form sought to be
preserved, disclosed or produced is relevant to
the matter in dispute in respect of which the
proceedings are intended to be instituted and is
in the possession or control of such respondent;
(d) the duty to preserve, disclose or produce any
electronic document upon the receipt of such
order extends to the document in electronic form
of which the applicant seeks preservation,
disclosure or production, if proceedings had
commenced against such person or entity;
(e) preservation, disclosure or production of such
document in electronic form is desirable in order
to –
(i) dispose the intended proceedings in a
fair manner;
(ii) assist the dispute to be resolved
without proceedings; or
(iii) save costs.
(4) Any person who or entity which receives an order made
under subsection (3) shall have a duty to comply therewith
and in the event of non- compliance, such person or entity
shall be guilty of the offence of contempt of court.
(5) Any party to any proceeding pending before a court
may, not less than forty-five days before the date first fixed
for the pre-trial conference, make an application for an
order to be made requiring any other party to such action
to preserve, disclose or produce any relevant document in
electronic form, as may be specified in such order.
(6) Any party making an application under subsection (5) of
this section shall -
(a) describe with reasonable particularity each
item or category of items to be preserved or
disclosed or produced; and
(b) specify the manner of preservation, disclosure
or production and by whom such preservation,
disclosure or production is to be performed.
(7) A party who receives an order made under subsection
(5) shall have a duty to comply therewith and in the event
of non-compliance, the court may-
(a) where the restoration of such document in
electronic form is possible, order for the
restoration of the same and award costs;
(b) where the restoration of the document in
electronic form is not possible and where the
court is of the opinion that prejudice has been
caused to the party making the application, due
to the loss of such document and that non-
complying party has acted with the intention of
depriving the use of such document by the other
party-
(i) impose costs in a sum as may be
deemed reasonable by the court; or
(ii) where the prejudice cause cannot be
cured by way of costs, in case of a
plaintiff, order to have his action
dismissed for want of prosecution, and in
case of a defendant, to have his defence,
if any, struck out, and to be placed in the
same position as if he had not appeared
and answered.
(8) A party or person failing to comply with an order made
under subsection (5) of this section shall not be entitled to
produce any such document in electronic form in evidence
on his behalf in such action, unless he satisfies the court
that such electronic document relates only to his own title,
or that he had some other sufficient cause for not
complying with such order.
(9) A party to any proceeding may make an application ex-
parte by way of a petition supported by an affidavit, not
less than forty-five days before the date fixed for pre-trial
conference, for an order to be made requiring any person
or entity who is not a party to such proceeding, to preserve,
disclose, or produce any document in electronic form in the
possession or control of such person or entity. The person
or entity against whom such order is sought shall only be
made the respondent in such application.
(10) Upon receipt of an application under subsection (9),
the court may make an order as prayed for in such
application, if -
(a) the document in electronic form of which the
preservation, disclosure or production is sought is
likely to support the case of the applicant or
adversely affect the case of any party to such
proceeding;
(b) preservation, disclosure or production is
necessary in order to disprove the claim in a fair
manner or to save costs.
(11) An order made under subsection (10) may-
(a) specify the documents in electronic form
which the respondent is required to preserve,
disclose or produce;
(b) if relevant, specify the time and place of
preservation, disclosure or production to take
place;
(c) specify the format or formats in which
document in electronic form is to be produced;
and
(d) require the respondent, when making
preservation or disclosure, to specify the
documents, if any, which are or not in his control
or possession with reasons therefor.
(12) Any person or entity who fails to comply with an order
made under subsection (10), shall be guilty of the offence
of contempt of court.
(13) Where a person, entity or party from whom
preservation, disclosure or production of a document is
sought under subsection (2), (5) or (9) objects to such
preservation, disclosure or production from the source of
such document for not being reasonably accessible due to
the burden of cost, the court may limit the extent of such
preservation, disclosure or production otherwise allowed
under the said subsections where -
(a) the preservation, discovery or production
sought is unreasonably cumulative, duplicative,
disproportionate or excessive to the material facts
of the case;
(b) the requested document in electronic form
can be obtained from any other source which is
more convenient, less burdensome or less
expensive;
(c) the party seeking preservation, disclosure or
production has had ample opportunity to obtain
such document by discovery in the action; or
(d) the requested document in electronic form is
irrelevant or not proportionate to the issues in
dispute or the party’s resources or the burden of
expense of the proposed discovery outweighs the
possible benefits and importance in resolving the
issues:
Provided however, the court may order preservation,
disclosure or production from the sources of such
document in electronic form, if the party making the
application for preservation, disclosure or production is
able to show good cause, subject to such limitations as
may be imposed by the court.
(14) Unless otherwise agreed or ordered, electronic copies
of the disclosed documents in electronic form shall be
produced -
(a) in their native format;
(b) in a manner which preserves metadata
relating to the date of creation of each such
document; and
(c) organised and labeled in a manner that
corresponds with the categories of such
documents as requested."; and
State required to 103A.
make discovery or
give inspection of (1) In any action to which the State is a party, the State
documents under may also be required to make discovery or give inspection
certain
circumstances. of documents.
[26,20 of 1977]
(2) The provisions of subsection (1) shall not prejudice the
right of the State to withhold any document on the ground
that in the opinion of the Minister in charge of the subject to
which the document relates, the public interest would suffer
by such disclosure.
Notice to produce 104.
documents for
inspection. [14, 29 of 2023] (1) Any party to an action may, fifteen days before the date
[14, 29 of 2023] first fixed for the pre-trial conference thereof, by motion ex
parte, obtain an order of court for notice to issue to any
other party in whose pleadings or affidavits reference is
made to any document, to produce such document for the
inspection of the party giving such notice, or of his
registered attorney, and to permit such party or registered
attorney to take copies thereof.
(2) No party failing to comply with such notice shall
afterwards be at liberty to put any such document in
evidence on his behalf in such action, unless he satisfies
the court that such document relates only to his own title,
or that he had some other and sufficient cause for not
complying with such notice.
Protective orders 104A. A party, person or an entity against whom the discovery,
[15, 29 of 2023]
production or preservation of a document or document in electronic
form is sought, may apply for a protective order to the court within
which such action is pending. The court may, for good cause, make
one or more of the following orders to protect any such document or
the interests of a person, entity or party: -
(a) prohibiting the disclosure or discovery;
(b) specifying terms, including the time, place, forms and
manner of the disclosure or discovery;
(c) prescribing a discovery method other than the one
selected by the party seeking discovery;
(d) prohibiting inquiry into certain matters or limiting the
scope of disclosures or discovery to other matters;
(e) designating persons or experts who may be present
while the discovery is conducted;
(f) appointing persons or experts who shall conduct the
disclosure, discovery, preservation, inspections, keep
custody, examination, analysis, reporting and presenting
them in court;
(g) directing that a confidential research, development or
trade secret or undisclosed or confidential information of
commercial nature not to be disclosed or disclosed only in
a specified manner; or
(h) directing that a document in relation to undisclosed
confidential research, development or trade secret or
undisclosed or confidential information of commercial
nature not to be disclosed or disclosed only in a specified
manner.".
Time and place of 105A. The party to whom such notice is given shall, within ten days
such production to
be specified by from the receipt thereof, deliver through the court to the party giving
party receiving the same a notice stating a time within three days from such delivery
notice.
at which the documents, or such of them as he does not object to
produce, may be inspected at his registered attorney's office or some
other convenient place, and stating which, if any, of the documents he
objects to produce, and on what grounds.
Otherwise, order for106. If any party served with notice under section 104 omits to give
inspection to be
made by court. notice under section 105 of the time for inspection, or objects to give
inspection, or names an inconvenient place for inspection, the party
desiring it may apply to the court for an order of inspection.
Application for order107. Except In the case of documents referred to in any pleading or
to be supported by
affidavit. affidavit of the party against whom the application is made, or
disclosed in his affidavit of documents, such application shall be
founded upon an affidavit showing-
(a) of what documents inspection is sought,
(b) that the party applying is entitled to inspect them, and
(c) that they are in the possession or power of the party
against whom the application is made.
Court may reserve 108. If the party from whom discovery of any kind or inspection is
question as to
discovery or sought objects to the same or any part thereof, and if the court is
inspection. satisfied that the right of such discovery or inspection depends on the
determination of any issue or question in dispute in the action, or that
for any other reason it is desirable that any such issue or question
should be determined before deciding upon the right to the discovery
or inspection, the court may order that the issue or question be
determined first, and reserve the question as to the discovery or
inspection.
Consequence of not109.
complying with
order under this [16, 29 of 2023] (1) If any party fails to comply with any order under this
Chapter. Chapter to answer interrogatories, or for discovery,
[16, 29 of 2023]
production, inspection, preservation or protection, which
has been duly served, he shall, if a plaintiff, be liable to
have his action dismissed for want of prosecution, and if a
defendant, to have his defence, if any, struck out, and to be
placed in the same position as if he had not appeared and
answered. And the party interrogating or seeking discovery,
production, or inspection may apply to the court for an
order to this effect, and the court may make such order
accordingly.
(2) Any party failing to comply with any order under this
Chapter to answer interrogatories, or for discovery,
production, or inspection which has been served personally
upon him, shall also be deemed guilty of the offence of
contempt of court.
Court may inspect 110.
records of other
courts. (1) The court may of its own accord, or in its discretion
upon the application of any of the parties to an action, send
for, either from its own records or from any other court, the
record of any 'other action or proceeding, and inspect the
same.
(2) Every application made under this section shall (unless
the court otherwise directs) be supported by an affidavit of
the applicant or his registered attorney, showing how the
record is material to the action in which the application is
made, and that the applicant cannot, without unreasonable
delay or expense, obtain a duly authenticated copy of the
record or of such portion thereof as the applicant requires,
or that the production of- the original is necessary for the
purposes of justice.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to enable the
court to use in evidence any document which by the law of
evidence in force in Sri Lanka would be inadmissible in the
action.
Parties to he ready 111. The parties or their registered attorneys shall bring with them and
with all documents
at trial. have in readiness at the hearing of the action, to be produced when
called for by the court, all the documentary evidence of every
description in their possession or power, on which they intend to rely,
and which has not already been filed in court, and all documents
which the court at any time before such hearing has ordered to be
produced.
Document called for112. No documentary evidence in the possession or power of any
and not produced
shall not be party which should have been, but has not been, produced in
received afterwards.accordance with the requirements of section 111, shall be received at
any subsequent stage of the proceedings, unless good cause be
shown to the satisfaction of the court for the non- production thereof.
And the court on receiving any such evidence shall record its reason
for so doing.
Documents to be 113.
received by court.
(1) The court shall receive the documents respectively
produced by the parties at the hearing, provided that the
documents produced by each party be accompanied by an
accurate list thereof. Rejection of irrelevant or inadmissible
documents.
(2) The court may at any stage of the action reject any
document which it considers irrelevant or otherwise
inadmissible, recording the grounds of such rejection.
No documents to be114.
placed on record
unless proved. (1) No document shall be placed on the record unless it
has been proved or admitted in accordance with the law of
evidence for the time being in force.
Proved (2) Every document so proved or admitted shall be
documents to
endorsed with some number or letter sufficient to identity it.
be marked and
filed. The Judge shall then make an entry on the record to the
effect that such document was proved against or admitted
by (as the case may be) the person against whom it is
used, and shall in such entry refer to such document by
such number or letter in such a way as to identify it with the
document so proved or admitted. The document shall then
be filed as part of the record.
Documents (3) All documents produced at the hearing and not so
which are not
proved or admitted shall be returned to the parties
proved to be
returned to respectively producing them.
parties.
Court may order 115. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 114, the court may,
any document to be
impounded. if it sees sufficient cause, direct any document or book produced
before it in any action to be impounded and kept in the custody of an
officer of the court for such period and subject to such conditions as
the court thinks fit.
When document 116.
admitted in
evidence may be (1) When an action has been disposed of, or when the time
returned. for preferring an appeal from the decree has elapsed, or if
an appeal has been preferred, then after the appeal has
been disposed of, any person, whether a party to the
action or not, desirous of receiving back any document
produced by him in the action, and placed on the record,
shall, unless the document is impounded under section
115, be entitled to receive back the same:
Provided that a document may be returned at any time if
the person applying for such return deliver to the proper
officer a certified copy of such document to be substituted
for the original;
Certain And provided further, that no document shall be returned
documents not
which by force of the decree has become void or useless.
to be returned.
Receipt for (2) On the return of a document which has been admitted
returned
in evidence, a receipt shall be given by the party receiving
documents.
it, in a receipt book to be kept for the purpose.
Provisions as to 117. The provisions of this Chapter as to documents shall, mutatis
documents apply to
other material mutandis, apply to all other material objects producible as evidence
objects and
documents in and to all documents in electronic form, to the extent not inconsistent
electronic form
with the provisions of this Chapter.
[17, 29 of 2023]
TRANSLATIONS OF DOCUMENTS
Translations of 118. No translation of any document tendered in evidence in any court
documents.
shall be permitted to be read as a translation of such document,
unless the same shall be signed by an interpreter of the Supreme
Court, or the Court of Appeal, or by a Government sworn translator, or
by a sworn translator or interpreter of some District Court, Family
Court or Primary Court.
Who shall be 119. No person other than an interpreter of the Supreme Court, or the
deemed a
translator. Court of Appeal, or a Government sworn translator, or an interpreter of
a District Court, or Family Court or Primary Court, shall be deemed to
be a translator of any court unless he shall have received a certificate
from the Judge of such court that he is competent to fulfill the duties of
a translator, and shall have taken an oath before such Judge faithfully
to perform the duties of his office.
Fees of translators. 120. No such translator as aforesaid shall be entitled to have or
recover in respect of fees for any translation any sum of money in
excess of the following rates, namely:-
[27,20 of 1977] For every folio of 120 words .. Rs. 1.25.
For every fractional part of a folio .. Rs. 1.25.
CHAPTER XVII
OF WITNESSES AND DOCUMENTS
Summonses to 121.
witnesses.
(1) The parties may, after the summons has been delivered
[18, 29 of 2023]
for service on the defendant, obtain, on application to the
court or to such officer as the court appoints in that behalf,
before the day fixed for the hearing, summonses to
persons whose attendance is required either to give
evidence or to produce documents.
(2) Repealed by [§18, 29 of 2023]
Payment of 122. The party applying for a summons shall, before the summons is
witness's expenses.
granted, and within a period to be fixed by the court, pay into court, or
give security for payment of, such a sum of money as appears to the
court to be sufficient to defray the traveling and other expenses of the
person summoned, in passing to and from the court in which he is
required to attend, and for one day's attendance:
Provided that in the case of a witness residing within four miles of the
court at which his attendance is required, no such payment shall be
made nor security given;
And provided further that the making of any such payment and the
giving of any such security shall in no case be a condition precedent to
the issue of a summons, but in every case (except the case of a
witness residing within four miles from the court) where summons
issues without such payment having been made or security given, the
witness shall be informed on the face of the summons that such is the
case, and that it is not obligatory on him to attend.
Witness's expenses123. The sum so paid into court, or so secured, shall at least be paid
to be paid before he
gives evidence. or tendered to the person summoned at the time when he is called on
to give his evidence, if he demands the same.
Court may order a 124. If it appears to the court or to such officer as it appoints in this
sufficient sum to be
paid. behalf that the sum paid into court is not sufficient to cover such
expenses, the court may direct such further sum to be paid to the
person summoned as appears to be necessary on that account; and in
case of default in payment, may, by writ issued to the Fiscal, order
such sum to be levied by sequestration and sale of the movable
property of the party obtaining the summons as is hereinafter
provided; or the court may discharge the person summoned without
requiring him to give evidence ; or may both order such levy and
discharge such person as aforesaid.
Expenses of 125. If it is necessary to detain the person summoned for a longer
detention.
period than one day, the court may from time to time order the party at
whose instance he was summoned to pay into court such sum as is
sufficient to defray the expenses of his detention for such further
period; and in default of such deposit being made, may, by writ issued
to the Fiscal, order such sum to be levied by sequestration and sale of
the movable property of the party at whose instance he was
summoned; or the court may discharge the person summoned without
requiring him to give evidence; or may both order such levy and
discharge such person as aforesaid.
Summons to specify126.
time, place, and
purpose of (1) Every summons for the attendance of a person to give
attendance. evidence or produce a document shall specify the time and
place at which he is required to attend and also whether
his attendance is required for the purpose of giving
evidence or to produce a document, or for both purposes;
and any particular document which the person summoned
is called on to produce shall be described in the summons
with reasonable accuracy.
(2) If money has been deposited or security given for his
expenses under the provisions of section 122, the
summons shall contain a statement to that effect.
Summons to 127. Any person may be summoned to produce a document without
produce document.
being summoned to give evidence; and any person summoned merely
to produce a document shall be deemed to have complied with the
summons if he cause such document to be produced, instead of
attending personally to produce the same.
Person in court may128. Any person present in court may be required by the court to give
be required to
produce a evidence, or to produce any document then and there in his actual
document. possession or power.
Service of 129. Every summons to a person to give evidence or produce a
summons.
document shall be served as nearly as may be in the manner
hereinbefore prescribed for the service of summons on the defendant;
and the rules contained in this Ordinance as to proof of service of
summons on the defendant shall apply in case of all summonses
served under this section.
Service must afford 130. The service shall in all cases be made a sufficient time before the
reasonable time for
attendance. time specified in the summons for the attendance of the person
summoned, to allow him a reasonable time for preparation and for
traveling to the place at which his attendance is required.
Procedure to be 131.
followed when
summons cannot be (1) If the Fiscal returns to the court that the summons for
served. the attendance of a person, either to give evidence or to
produce a document, cannot be served, the court may take
evidence touching the non-service.
And upon being satisfied that such evidence or production
is material, and that the person for whose attendance the
summons has been issued is absconding, or keeping out
of the way for the purpose of avoiding the service of
summons, the court may in its discretion either issue a
warrant for the apprehension of such witness or may issue
a proclamation requiring him to attend to give evidence, or
produce the document, at a time and place to be named
therein; and a copy of such proclamation shall be affixed
on the outer door of the house in which he ordinarily
resides.
Proclaimed (2) If he does not attend at the time and place named in
Witness how
such proclamation, the court may in its discretion, at the
dealt with.
instance of the party on whose application the summons
was issued make an order for the sequestration of the
property of the person whose attendance is required, to
such amount as the court thinks fit, not exceeding the
amount of the costs of sequestration and of the fine which
may be imposed under section 133.
If witness appears 132. If, on the sequestration of his 'property, such person appears and
sequestration may
be withdrawn. satisfies the court that he did not abscond or keep out of the way to
avoid service of the summons, and that he had not notice of the
proclamation in time to attend at the time and place named therein,
the court shall direct that the property be released from sequestration,
and shall make such order as to the costs of the sequestration as it
thinks fit.
Procedure when 133. If such person does not appear, or appearing, fails to satisfy the
witness fails to
appear. court that he did not abscond or keep out of the way to avoid service
of the summons, and that he had not notice of the proclamation in time
to attend at the time and place named therein, the court may impose
upon him such fine, in the case of the Primary Court not exceeding
fifty rupees, and in the case of the District Court not exceeding two
hundred rupees, as the court thinks fit, having regard to his condition
in life and all the circumstances of the case; and may order the
property sequestered, or any part thereof, to be sold for the purpose of
satisfying all costs incurred in consequence of such sequestration,
together with the amount of the said fine, if any:
Provided that if the person whose attendance is required pays into
court the costs and the fine as aforesaid, the court shall order the
property to be released from sequestration.
Court may summon134 Subject to the rules of this Ordinance as to attendance and
and examine any
person as witness. appearance, if the court at any time thinks it necessary to examine any
person other than a party to the action, and not named as a witness by
a party to the action, the court may, of its own motion, cause such
person to be summoned as a witness to give evidence, or to produce
any document in his possession, on a day to be appointed; and may
examine him as a witness, or require him to produce such document.
Person summoned 135. Subject as last aforesaid, whoever is summoned to appear and
must attend at time
and place named ingive evidence in an action must attend at the time and place named in
the summons. the summons for that purpose, and whoever is summoned to produce
a document must either attend to produce it, or cause it to be
produced, at such time and place.
When witness may 136. No person so summoned and attending shall depart unless and
depart.
until-
(a) he has been examined or has produced the document
and the court has risen; or
(b) he has obtained the court's leave to depart.
Witness may be 137.
arrested for non-
compliance with (1) If any person on whom a summons to give evidence or
summons. produce a document has been served fails to comply with
the summons, or if any person so summoned and
attending departs in contravention of section 136, the court
may order him to be arrested and brought before the court:
Provided that no such order shall be made when the court
has reason to believe that the person so failing had a
lawful excuse for such failure.
Non-compliance(2) When any person so brought before the court fails to
with summons
satisfy it that he had a lawful excuse for not complying with
without awful
excuse deemedthe summons, he shall be deemed to be guilty of the
to be contempt
offence of contempt of court, and punishable therefor.
of court.
Court may release 138. If any person so apprehended and brought before the court
arrested witness on
bail. cannot, owing to the absence of the parties or any of them give the
evidence or produce the document which he has been summoned to
give or produce, the court may require him to give reasonable bail or
other security for his appearance at such time and place as it thinks fit,
and on such bail or security being given may release him.
Procedure when 139. If any person so failing to comply with a summons absconds or
witness absconds.
keeps out of the way, so that he cannot be apprehended and brought
before the court, the provisions of sections 131, 132, and 133 shall,
mutatis mutandis apply.
Court may pass 140. If any party to an action being present in court refuses, without
decree against party
refusing to give lawful excuse, when required by the court, to give evidence, or to
evidence. produce any document then and there in his actual possession or
power, the court may in its discretion either pass a decree against him,
or make such other order in relation to the action as the court thinks fit,
or may punish him as for a contempt of court.
Rules as to 141.
witnesses to apply
to a party (1) Whenever any party to an action is required to give
summoned to give evidence or produce a document, the rules as to witnesses
evidence.
contained in this Ordinance shall apply to him, so far as
they are applicable.
(2) Nothing in this Chapter contained shall be deemed in
any way to contravene or affect the provisions of the Proof
of Public Documents Ordinance except in so far as the
same may be hereby expressly repealed or modified.
Privilege from arrest142. Any person duly and in good faith summoned or ordered to
of witness.
attend for the purpose of being examined in a case is privileged from
arrest in a civil action or special proceeding while going to, remaining
at, and returning from the place where he is required to attend.
CHAPTER XVIIA
PRE -TRIAL CONFERENCE AND PRE-TRIAL
ORDERS [§19, 29 of 2023]
Pre-trial conference.142A.
[19, 29 of 2023]
(1) The court shall conduct a pre-trial conference with the
Attorneys-at-law representing the parties and the parties
not so represented, for the following purposes :-
(a) to facilitate a settlement between the parties
as specified in subsection (2), ensuring that the
matters not so settled shall only be fixed for trial;
(b) to expedite the disposition of the action
through judicial case management;
(c) improving the quality of the trial through prior
preparation and case management orders so that
the action will not be protracted due to lack of trial
management;
(d) to identify the key issues at an early stage, in
order to discourage unnecessary pre-trial
applications;
(e) to facilitate the discovery of evidence;
(f) to identify the witnesses and documents and
avoid unnecessary production of evidence at the
trial; and
(g) to fix strict time limits for pre-trial orders and
enforcement thereof.
(2)
(a) The Judge shall, at the pre-trial conference,
make every effort to persuade the parties to
arrive at a settlement of the dispute and where
the parties agree for a settlement, such
settlement shall be recorded and signed by the
parties and an order shall be made in accordance
with the terms of such settlement.
(b) The Judge in an appropriate case, may direct
the parties to appear either in person or in the
case of a party being a legal person, an
authorized representative thereof to be present at
the pre-trial conference in order to facilitate a
settlement, adjustment, compromise or other
agreements.
(3) The judge at the pre-trial conference may determine
unresolved jurisdictional and legal issues.
Pre-trial orders. 142B. Subject to the provisions of section 104A, the Judge shall, at
[19, 29 of 2023]
the pre-trial conference, discuss with the parties, and make
appropriate pre-trial orders on the following matters: -
(a) identifying and obtaining admissions of facts or
documents;
(b) identifying the number of witnesses to be called at the
trial based on the relevancy and admissibility to the case
and dispensing with calling of unnecessary witnesses;
(c) identifying the documents to be produced at the trial
based on the relevancy, admissibility, to the case and
authenticity of documents and in appropriate instances
dispense with proof of such documents;
(d) with regard to the discovery, inspection, protection,
preservation and production of documents and tangible
things including specification of terms, time, place, manner
and form in which such documents and tangible things to
be discovered, protected, preserved and produced in court
and authentication of documents and signatures;
(e) the protection of trade secrets, other confidential
research information and undisclosed commercial
information subject to privileges and limitations;
(f) issuing of certified copies of documents in the custody of
any public office, public corporation, provincial council,
local authority, bank, body incorporate or unincorporate,
partnership, hospital, medical institute, court, tribunal or
any such similar institution:
Provided that, the provisions of this paragraph shall not
prejudice the right of the State to withhold any document
on the ground that in the opinion of the Minister assigned in
terms of Article 44 or 45 of the Constitution the subject to
which the document relates, the public interest would suffer
by such disclosure;
(g) upon the agreement of the parties, issuing of
commissions to a single, joint or court appointed
independent experts to inquire and report on any question
of fact and express an opinion thereof:
Provided that, any application for the issue of a
commission for local investigation as referred to in Chapter
XXIX shall be made prior to the day first fixed for the pre-
trial conference:
Provided further, that the court may, in its discretion, issue
a commission for such local investigation after the day first
fixed for pre-trial conference if it is satisfied, for reasons to
be recorded and subject to terms as to costs or otherwise,
that a commission is necessary for the determination of the
matters in dispute or settlement of the dispute between the
parties;
(h) recording of any agreement of parties with regard to
any matter, including any issues of facts or law, mode of
proof of any fact or document or the number of witnesses
to be called or number of documents to be produced at the
trial, and entering of orders or judgment in accordance with
such agreement of parties:
Provided that, the court shall read out and explain the
effect of such agreement to the parties concerned and
record the fact that the parties understand the contents of
such agreement and the effect thereof and the parties shall
sign the agreement or the case record where such
agreement is recorded orally in open court;
(i) consolidating two or more actions, subject to the
provisions of section 149A;
(j) withdrawal of actions;
(k) the use of technology or employing a special interpreter
at the trial;
(l) identifying the number of trial dates or period within
which a trial may be concluded and how the time available
for the trial will be used; or
(m) any other step as may be necessary or desirable for
the just and expeditious disposal of the action.
Parties to be ready 142C. The parties or their registered attorneys shall, at the pre-trial
with original
documents. conference, bring with them and have in readiness at the pre-trial
[19, 29 of 2023] conference, original or certified copies of all documents specified in
the list of documents and tendered to the registry of the court under
section 79B.
Permission of court 142D.
to call additional
witnesses and (1) The court shall, at the pre-trial conference, on
additional application of any party, grant permission to such party, to
documents
identified or call any witness or produce any document at the trial, if
discovered at pre- such witness or document is identified at such conference
trial conference.
to be relevant to the matters in dispute, notwithstanding
[19, 29 of 2023]
such witness or document not being included in the list of
witnesses or documents filed under paragraph (b) of
section 79B:
Provided that, the pre-trial Judge may award costs against
the party seeking to tender documents or summon
witnesses which had not been included in the list filed
under paragraph (b) of section 79B unless such party can
adduce sufficient reasons for the failure to include such
documents or witnesses in the said list.
(2) The court may, at its discretion, grant permission at the
pre- trial conference, to any party to produce any document
at the trial and call any witness in proof thereof, if such
document is discovered under Chapter XVI relevant to the
matters in dispute.
(3) Where the court grants permission to call any additional
witness or document under subsection (1) or (2), the court
shall, at the pre- trial conference, record the fact that such
party is entitled to call such witness or produce such
document at the trial and no further list of witnesses or
documents is required to be filed thereafter.
Pre-trial steps not to142E. Subject to the provisions of this Act, any application for pre-trial
be allowed after
fixing the date of steps shall not be allowed after the conclusion of the pre-trial
trial. conference of an action unless the court is satisfied for reasons to be
[19, 29 of 2023]
recorded and subject to costs that a grave and irremediable injustice
would be caused if such steps are not permitted and the party
applying for such steps is not guilty of laches.
Determination of 142F.
issues.
(1) Where the judge is satisfied that all the pre-trial steps
[19, 29 of 2023]
have been taken, the Judge shall determine the issues,
taking into consideration the pleadings, proposed
admissions and issues of the parties, interrogatories,
documents, agreement of the parties and reports if any,
submitted to court during the pre-trial conference.
(2) Where issues both of law and facts arise in the same
action, and the court is of the opinion that the case may be
disposed of on the issues of law only, the court shall try
such issues first and for that purpose the court may, if it
thinks fit, postpone the settlement of the issues of fact until
after the issues of law have been determined.
Advancement or 142G. The Judge conducting the pre-trial conference may, either on
postponement of
pre-trial. his own motion or on the application of any party and for sufficient
[19, 29 of 2023] cause shown, advance or postpone the date fixed for the pre-trial
conference:
Provided that, the Judge conducting the pre- trial conference shall
conclude the hearing within four months from the commencement of
such conference, unless the Judge is prevented from acting
accordingly for reasons which shall be recorded, including delays in
adducing evidence or discoveries.
Default of parties. 142H. Where any party-
[19, 29 of 2023]
(a) fails to diligently take steps according to the provisions
of Chapters XB and this Chapter or diligently prosecute or
defend the case during the pre- trial conference or fails to
comply with any pre-trial order without any reasonable
ground; or
(b) fails to appear without sufficient cause on the day fixed
for the pretrial conference or on any other day to which it is
adjourned,
the Judge conducting the pre-trial conference may, taking
into consideration all appropriate circumstances -
(i) subject to the payment of costs or pre-payment
of costs, make such appropriate order as he may
think fit, including, directing such party to comply
with the requirement which was not complied
with, unless such non-compliance was
substantially justified;
(ii) continue further proceedings notwithstanding
such default was made by any party who has
obtained any pre- trial order, disregarding any
such pre- trial order and upon such terms as to
costs being awarded against such defaulting
party; or
(iii) proceed to dispose of the action in one of the
methods specified in Chapter XII:
Provided that, the Judge shall make every endeavor to
make orders in terms of paragraph (i) or (ii), prior to an
order being made under paragraph (iii), unless a party is
absent and unrepresented at the pre-trial conference.".
CHAPTER XVIII
OF ADJOURNMENTS
Adjournments. 143.
[10,79 of 1988] (1) The court may, if sufficient cause be shown at any
stage of the action, grant time to the parties or to any of
them, and may from time to time adjourn the hearing of the
action:
Provided however, that no adjournment in excess of Six
weeks may be granted except in exceptional
circumstances, and for reasons to be recorded.
(2) In all such cases the court shall fix a day for the further
hearing of the action, and may make such order as it thinks
fit with respect to the costs occasioned by the adjournment:
Provided that, when the hearing of evidence has once
begun, the hearing of the action shall be continued from
day to day until all the witnesses in attendance have been
examined, unless the court finds the adjournment of the
hearing to be necessary for reasons to be recorded and
signed by the Judge.
Non-appearance of 144. If on any day to which the hearing of the action is adjourned, the
a party on the
adjourned day. parties or any of them fail to appear, the court may proceed to dispose
of the action in one of the modes directed in that behalf by Chapter
XII, or make such other order as it thinks fit.
Default of party to 145. If any party to an action, to whom time has been granted, fails to
carry out purpose of
adjournment. produce his evidence, or to cause the attendance of his witnesses, or
to perform any other act necessary to the further progress of the
action, for which time has been allowed, the court may,
notwithstanding such default, proceed to decide the action forthwith.
[Section 146, 147 and 148 is repealed by Law No. 8 of 2017]
Amendment of 149. The court may, at any time before passing a decree, amend the
Issues.
issues or frame additional issues on such terms as it thinks fit.
Consolidation of 149A.
actions.
(1) The court may order, two or more actions in which the
[11, 8 of 2017]
questions of law or fact in issue are substantially the same,
to be consolidated upon such terms as the court may deem
fit and on the agreement of Parties.
(2) The Court may order -
(a) several actions to be tried at the same time
and on the same evidence; or
(b) the evidence in one action to be used as
evidence in another; or
(c) one of several actions to be tried and other
actions to be stayed to abide by the result,
with the consent of the parties:
Provided that on the application of any party the court shall
have power to try another of the actions so stayed where
the selected action fails to be a real trial of the issues
involved.
Party having right to150. The party having the right to begin shall state his case, giving the
begin to state his
case. substance of the facts which he proposes to establish by his evidence.
Explanation 1
Rules as to right to begin
The plaintiff has the right to begin unless where
the defendant admits the facts alleged by the
plaintiff, and contends that either in point of law or
on some additional facts alleged by the defendant
the plaintiff is not entitled to any part of the relief
which he seeks, in which case the defendant has
the right to begin.
Explanation 2
The case enunciated must reasonably accord with
the party's pleading, i.e., plaint or answer, as the
case may be. And no party can be allowed to
make at the trial a case materially different from
that which he has placed on record, and which his
opponent is prepared to meet. And the facts
proposed to be established must in the whole
amount to so much of the material part of his case
as is not admitted in his opponent's pleadings.
Party having right to151. After stating his case in person, or by his registered attorney or
begin to produce his
evidence. counsel, the same party shall produce his evidence, calling his
witnesses and by questions eliciting from each of them the relevant
and material facts to which such witness can speak of his own
observation.
Explanation
The questions should be simple, and so framed as
to obtain from the witnesses, as nearly as may be
in a chronological order, a narrative of all the facts
relevant to the matter in issue between the parties
which he has witnessed- i.e., which he has in any
manner directly observed or perceived, and no
others. And on any disputed point the questions
should not be such as to lead, or suggest, the
answer; nor such as to induce a witness, other
than an expert, to state a conclusion of his
reasoning, an inference of fact, or a matter of
belief, in the place of describing what he actually
observed.
Also, a general request to a witness to tell what he
knows, or to state the facts of the case, is, as a
rule, not to be permitted, because it gives an
opening for a prepared story.
Nothing in this explanation operates to prevent a
witness from stating hearsay, or giving any
opinion, where the hearsay or opinion is a relevant
fact in the case.
Affidavit may be 151A.
substituted.
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 151, the court
[12, 8 of 2017]
may, on its own motion or at the request of one of the
parties to the action, order that an affidavit be substituted
for an oral examination in chief of a witness and direct the
party calling such witness to tender such affidavit on a date
fixed by the court which date shall be at least one month
prior to the date of trial, to enable the opposite party to
prepare for the trial.
(2) Where an order is made by the court under subsection
(1), the party who is responsible for tendering the affidavit
shall tender it together with the documents referred to
therein, to the Registrar of the court with the proof of
service of a copy of the affidavit with copies of all
documents of the opposite party.
(3) On the date of the trial, the party tendering the affidavit
shall produce the affidavit through the witness who has
affirmed to or sworn to it, including all documents referred
therein. The opposite party is entitled to object to its being
received, either on the inadmissibility of such evidence or a
part of the evidence or on the inadmissibility or authenticity
of any documents annexed to such affidavit. In such event,
the court may make a ruling on such objection, prior to the
witness being cross examined by the opposite party:
Provided that, the court may, in appropriate circumstances,
permit the leading of oral evidences, in addition to the
evidence contained in the affidavit.
(4) If an affidavit contains evidence of matters of hearsay
or any matter which is scandalous, the court may order
deletion of such matters and may proceed with the rest of
the matters in the affidavit or may order the party who filed
such affidavit to tender a fresh admissible affidavit and the
party filing such inadmissible affidavit shall be liable to the
payment of costs.
Cross-examination. 152. After the examination-in-chief by the party who called the
witness, the cross-examination of the same witness, if required, shall
in like manner be effected by the opposite side, only that in this case
leading questions may be put.
Re-examination. 153. Then shall follow re-examination by the first side if required, for
the purpose of enabling the witness to explain such answers given by
him on cross-examination as may have left facts imperfectly stated by
him, and to add such further facts as may have been suggested and
made admissible by the cross-examination
Explanation
During the course of the examination, cross-
examination, and re-examination, the court ought
not, as a general rule, to interfere, except when
necessary for the purpose of causing questions to
be put in a clear and proper shape, of checking
improper questions and of making the witness give
precise answers. At the end of it, however, if it has
been reasonably well conducted, the court ought
to know fairly the position of the witness with
regard to the material facts of the case, and it
should then put such questions to the witness as it
may consider necessary to possess itself of all the
detailed relevant facts to which the witness can
speak from personal observation, or which bear
upon his trustworthiness.
Tender of 154.
documents in
evidence. (1) Every document or writing which a party intends to use
as evidence against his opponent must be formally
tendered by him in the course of proving his case at the
time when its contents or purport are first immediately
spoken to by a witness. If it is an original document already
filed in the record of some action, or the deposition of a
witness made therein, it must previously be procured from
that record by means of, and under an order from, the
court. If it is a portion of the pleadings, or a decree or order
of court made in another action, it shall not generally be
removed there from, but a certified copy thereof shall be
used in evidence instead.
Records of (2) It shall not be competent to the court to admit in
other actions
evidence the entire body of proceedings and papers of
not to be
admitted in another action indiscriminately. Each of the constituent
bulk.
documents, pleadings, or processes of the former action,
which may be required in the pending action, must be dealt
with separately as above directed.
Documents (3) The document or writing being admitted in evidence,
admitted to be
the court, after marking it with a distinguishing mark or
read aloud in
court. letter by which it should, when necessary, be ever after
referred to throughout the trial, shall cause it, or so much of
it as the parties may desire, to be read aloud.
Explanation
If the opposing party does not, on the document
being tendered in evidence, object to its being
received, and if the document is not such as is
forbidden by law to be received in evidence, the
court should admit it.
If, however, on the document being tendered the
opposing party objects to its being admitted in
evidence, then commonly two questions arise for
the court:-
Firstly, whether the document is authentic- in other
words, is what the party tendering it represents it
to be; and
Secondly, whether, supposing it to be authentic, it
constitutes legally admissible evidence as against
the party who is sought to be affected by it.
The latter question in general is matter of
argument only, but the first must be supported by
such testimony as the party can adduce. If the
court is of opinion that the testimony adduced for
this purpose, developed and tested by cross-
examination, makes out a prima facie case of
authenticity and is further of opinion that the
authentic document is evidence admissible
against the opposing party, then it should admit
the document as before.
If, however, the court is satisfied that either of
those questions must be answered in the
negative, then it should refuse to admit the
document.
Whether the document is admitted or not it should
be marked as soon as any witness makes a
statement with regard to it; and if not earlier
marked on this account, it must, at least, be
marked when the court decides upon admitting it.
Proof of deed or 154A.
document
unnecessary in (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Evidence
certain events Ordinance (Chapter 14), in any proceedings under this
[2, 17 of 2022]
Code, it shall not be necessary to adduce formal proof of
the execution or genuineness of any deed, or document
which is required by law to be attested, other than a will
executed under the Wills Ordinance (Chapter 60), and on
the face of it purports to have been duly executed, unless-
(a) in the pleadings or further pleadings in an
action filed under regular procedure in terms of
this Code, the execution or genuineness of such
deed or document is impeached and raised as an
issue; or
(b) the court requires such proof:
Provided that, the provisions of this section shall
not be applicable in an event, a party to an action
seeks to produce any deed or document not
included in the pleadings of that party at any
proceedings under this Code.
(2) The provisions of subsection (1), shall mutatis mutandis
apply in the actions on summary procedure under this
Code.
Procedure to be 155. Before a witness is allowed to, in any way, identify a document,
followed before
witness is asked to he should generally be made, by proper questioning, to state the
identify document. grounds of his knowledge with regard to it.
Illustration
If the witness is about to speak to the act, or
factum, of signature he should first be made to
explain concisely the occurrences which led to his
being present on the occasion of the signing; and
if he is about to recognize a signature on the
strength of his knowledge of the supposed signer's
handwriting, he should first be made to slate the
mode in which this knowledge was acquired.
Cross-examination 156. The questioning for this purpose should be effected by the party
as to knowledge.
who is seeking to prove the document; and the opposing party, if he
desires to do so, should be allowed to interpose with cross-
examination on this point before the document is shown to the
witness.
Court to see witness157. It is the duty of the court, in the Court to see event of a witness
thus tested.
professing to be able to witness thus tested recognize or identify
writing, always to take care that his capacity to do so is thus tested,
unless the opposite party admits it.
And to decide on his158. If on the examination effected for this purpose it appears to the
competency.
court that the witness was not in tact present at the time Of signing, or
is not reasonably competent to identify the handwriting, then the court
shall not permit him to give his testimony on the matter of the
signature.
Signature by a mark159.
how proved.
(1) The signature of a person, which purports or which
appears by the evidence to have been written by the pen of
another, is not proved until both the fact of the writing and
the authority of the writer to write the name on the
document as a signature is proved.
(2) Subsection (1) applies to the case where the signature
is a mark explained by the name written adjacent thereto.
Proof in the case of 160. In the case of an illiterate person, who cannot read, it must also
an illiterate person.
be proved that at the time when his name was written on, or his mark
put to, the document, he understood the contents of it:
Provided that where the name of such illiterate person shall have been
written on, or his mark put to, any document for the purpose merely of
attesting the signature of another, it shall not be necessary to prove
that he understood the contents of such document, but it shall be
sufficient to prove that he was aware of the purpose for which this
name was so written or his mark so put, and that the person whose
signature he purports to attest was known to him.
Case of documents 161. When the document purports on the face of it to be so old that
whose execution
need not be proved.proof of the actual execution is not required by law, it is not proved
until sufficient evidence has been given to prove both that it comes
into court from the proper custody, and that it has continued to be in
proper custody throughout the period during which it can be
reasonably accounted for.
Copy of absent 162. When the document, the admission of which is objected to, is put
original how proved.
forward as the copy of an absent original, it is not proved until both
such evidence as is sufficient to prove the correctness of the copy,
and also such evidence as would be sufficient to prove the original,
had it been tendered instead of the copy, has been given.
Note:- The question whether a copy document is admissible in
evidence between the parties in the place of the original is quite
distinct from the question whether the document (original or copy) is
admissible as evidence relevant to the issue under trial.
On termination of 163. When the party beginning has stated his case and adduced his
beginning party's
case the opposing evidence in accordance with the foregoing rules, then the opposing
party to state and party or parties (if there are more than one, who have distinct cases)
prove his in like
manner. Reply. shall in person, or by registered attorney or counsel, state his or their
When rebutting case or cases (and in the latter event in succession), and when the
evidence is
admissible. case of each opposing party has been so stated each such party shall
adduce in order his evidence, oral and documentary, and the same
shall be received and dealt with precisely as in the case of the party
beginning, who shall then be entitled to reply. But where there are
several issues, the burden of proving some of which lies on the other
party or parties, the party beginning may at his option either produce
his evidence on those issues or reserve it by way of answer to the
evidence produced by the opposing party or parties; and in the latter
case the party beginning may produce evidence on those issues after
the other party or parties has or have produced all his or their
evidence, and such other party or parties may then reply specially on
the evidence so produced by the party beginning, but the party
beginning will in that case be entitled to reply generally on the whole
case.
Court may question 164. The court may at any time, whether before or after the
witness at any time.
examination of a witness by the respective parties or during such
examination, put and interpose such questions as it may consider
conducive to the attainment of truth and justice. And the answers to
such questions shall be made to appear on the face of the record as
having been given to the court.
Court may recall 165. The court may also in its discretion recall any witness, whose
Witness.
testimony has been taken, for further examination or cross-
examination, whenever in the course of the trial it thinks it necessary
for the ends of justice to do so.
When may court 166. The court may for grave cause, to be recorded by it at the time,
permit departure
from above Rules. permit a departure from the course of trial prescribed in the foregoing
rules.
Evidence of witness167. The evidence of the witnesses shall be given orally, as above
to be given orally in
open court. prescribed, in open court in the presence and under the personal
direction and superintendence of the Judge.
Witness to be 168. Witnesses professing to be Christians or Jews, who have
examined on oath,
or affirmation. discretion to understand the nature of an oath, shall be examined
upon oath, unless they state that, according to their religious tenets or
on other grounds they object to the taking of an oath, in which case
they shall be examined on affirmation. Witnesses not professing to be
Christians or Jews shall be examined on affirmation. The same rule
shall apply to affidavits. And except when hereinafter otherwise
expressly provided, the oath or affirmation shall be administered in
open court.
Evidence of witness169. The evidence of each witness shall be taken down in writing by
how taken down.
the Judge, or in his presence and hearing and under his personal
[30,20 of 1977]
direction and superintendence. The evidence shall be taken down
ordinarily in the form of a narrative.
Any particular 170. The court may of its own motion or on the application of any party
question and
answer may be take down or cause to be taken down any particular question and
taken down. answer, or any objection to any question, if there appear to the court
any special reason for so doing.
The objection to 171. If any question put to a witness be objected to, and the court
question which is
allowed and the allows the same to be put, the Judge may in his discretion take down
decision of court in writing the question, the answer, the objection, and the name of the
thereon may be
taken down. party making it, together with the decision of the court thereon.
The objection to 172. If on objection made the court refuses to allow the question to be
question disallowed
and the decision of put, the Judge shall, on the request of the questioner, take down in
court thereon to be writing the question, the objection, and the name of the party making
taken down.
it, together with the decision of the court thereon.
Court may record 173. The court may record such remarks as it thinks material
remarks on
demeanour of respecting the demeanour of any witness while under examination.
witness.
Witnesses may be 174. The witnesses on either side or on both or all sides shall, on
kept out of court.
motion of any of the parties, be kept out of court and of hearing,
except the witness immediately under examination; nor shall any
witness, who shall remain in court or within hearing after order made
to that effect, be permitted to give evidence, unless in the case of a
witness called to prove some fact which has incidentally become
essential in the course of the trial, and the necessity of which could not
reasonably have been anticipated. And every witness who has been
examined shall be kept separate from, and shall be allowed no
communication with, those who still remain to be examined:
Provided that it shall be lawful for the court in its discretion to allow
any witness to be examined, if it shall think such examination
conducive to the attainment of truth or justice, notwithstanding that
such witness shall have remained in court or within hearing contrary to
such order aforesaid.
No witness to be 175.
called or document
to be produced [20, 29 of 2023] (1) No witness shall be called on behalf of any party unless
unless included in such witness shall have been included in the list of
list of witnesses or
documents. witnesses previously filed in court by such party as
[20, 29 of 2023] provided by subparagraph (i) of paragraph (b) of section
79B or permitted by court under section 142D:
Provided, however, that the court may in its discretion, if
special circumstances appear to it to render such a course
advisable in the interests of justice, permit a witness to be
examined, although such witness may not have been
included in such list aforesaid,
Provided also that any party to an action may be called as
a witness without his name having been included in any
such list.
[31,20 of 1977] (2) A document which is required to be included in the list
[20, 29 of 2023] of documents filed in court by a party as provided by
subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (b) of section 79B and
which is not so included or not permitted by court under
section 142D shall not, without the leave of the court, be
received in evidence at the trial of the action:
Provided that nothing in this subsection shall apply to
documents produced for cross examination of the
witnesses of the opposite party or handed over to a
witness merely to refresh his memory.
[20, 29 of 2023] (3) Where an order is made under this section, the court
shall take into consideration any order made under section
142B.
Court may forbid 176. The court may forbid any questions or inquiries which it regards
indecent or
scandalous as indecent or scandalous, although such questions or inquiries may
questions. have some bearing on the questions before the court, unless they
relate to facts in issue or to matters necessary to be known in order to
determine whether or not the fact in issue existed.
Court shall forbid 177. The court shall forbid any question which appears to it to be
insulting questions.
intended to insult or annoy, or which, though proper in itself, appears
to the court needlessly offensive in form.
Evidence de bene 178.
esse.
(1) If a witness is about to leave the jurisdiction of the
court, or if other sufficient cause is shown to the
satisfaction of the court why his evidence should be taken
immediately, the court may upon the application of either
party or of the witness, at any time after the institution of
the action and before trial, take the evidence of such
witness in manner hereinbefore provided.
(2) Where such evidence is not taken forthwith, and in the
presence of the parties, such notice as the court thinks
sufficient of the day fixed for the examination shall be given
to the parties.
(3) The evidence so taken may be read at any hearing of
the action, provided that the witness cannot then be
produced.
Evidence taken on 179. The court may at any time, for sufficient reason, order that any
affidavit or on
commission. particular factor facts may be proved by affidavit, or by depositions
taken on commission, instead of by the testimony of witnesses given
viva voce before it, or that the affidavit, or deposition taken on
commission, of any witness may be read at the hearing of the action
on such conditions as the court shall think reasonable;
Provided that when it appears to the court that either party bona fide
desires the production of a witness before the court for cross-
examination viva voce, and that such witness can be so produced, an
order shall not be made authorizing the evidence of such witness to be
given otherwise than viva voce.
Court may examine 180. In the event of an order having been made for the proof of facts
witness viva voce
notwithstanding by affidavit, or by deposition taken on commission, the court may,
affidavit or nevertheless, at the instance of either party order the attendance of
commission.
the declarant or deponent at the hearing of the action for viva voce
cross-examination, if he is in Sri Lanka and can be produced.
What statements 181. Affidavits shall be confined to the statement of such facts as the
may affidavit
contain. declarant is able of his own knowledge and observation to testify to,
except on interlocutory applications in which statement of his belief
may be admitted, provided that reasonable grounds for such belief be
set forth in the affidavit.
Petitions cannot be 182. A petition stating facts of observation and belief is not converted
converted to
affidavits. into an affidavit by the addition of a verifying clause, an affirmation or
oath, to the effect that the statements in the petition are true.
Who may 183. In the case of any affidavit under this Chapter -
administer oaths.
(a) any court, or Magistrate, or Justice of the Peace; or
[11,79 of 1988]
(b) any officer whom the Minister in charge of the subject of
Justice may appoint for the purpose (and who shall be
styled " Commissioner for Oaths ") may administer the oath
to the declarant.
(c) any person qualified to administer an Oath or
affirmation according to the law of the country, in which the
affidavit is sworn or affirmed.
Who may make 183A. Where any person is required under the provisions of this
affidavits in lieu of
the parties to the Code, or under any other law for the time being in force, to make an
action. affidavit, then-
[12,79 of 1988]
(a) where the action is brought by or against the Attorney-
General, any officer of the State, and
(b) where the action is brought by or against a corporation,
board, public body, or company, any secretary, director or
other principal officer of such corporation, board, public
body or company; and
(c) where any party to the action is absent from Sri Lanka,
his attorney duly authorized to bring, conduct or defend the
action, as the case may be; and
(d) where any party to the action, or where there is more
than one party to the action such of the parties as are in Sri
Lanka, or when such attorney of the parties as is just
above mentioned, is or are unable, for want of personal
knowledge or bodily or mental infirmity, to make the
required affidavit, any recognized agent of such party,
may make an affidavit in respect of these matters, instead of the party
to the action:
Provided that in each of the foregoing cases the person who makes
the affidavit instead of the party to the action, must be a person having
personal knowledge of the facts of the cause of action, and must in his
affidavit swear or affirm that he deposes from his own personal
knowledge of the matter therein contained and shall be liable to be
examined as to the subject-matter thereof at the discretion of the
Judge, as the party to the action would have been, if the affidavit had
been made by such party.
Punishment for 183B. Where any person wilfully makes any false statement by
willful false
statement made affidavit or otherwise, in the course of any of the proceedings
under section 183A.aforesaid he may be punished as for a contempt of court, besides his
[12,79 of 1988]
liability to be tried and punished under the Penal Code for the offence
of giving false evidence, where such statement is on oath or
affirmation.
CHAPTER XX
JUDGMENT AND DECREE
Judgment when 184.
pronounced.
(1) The court, upon the evidence which has been duly
taken or upon the facts admitted in the pleadings or
otherwise, and after the parties have been heard either in
person or by their respective counsel or registered
attorneys (or recognized agents), shall, after consultation
with the assessors (if any), pronounce judgment in open
court, either at once or on some future day, of which notice
shall be given to the parties or their registered attorneys at
the termination of the trial.
(2) On the day so fixed, if the court is not prepared to give
its judgment, a yet future day may be appointed and
announced for the purpose.
Judge may 185. A Judge may pronounce a judgment written by his predecessor,
pronounce
judgment written by but not pronounced,
predecessor.
Judgment to be in 186. The judgment shall be in writing and shall be dated and signed
writing and to be
dated and signed inby the Judge in open court at the time of pronouncing it.
open court.
[32,20 of 1977]
Validation in certain 186A. Where a Judge pronounces a judgment written by his
circumstances of
judgments predecessor but not pronounced as provided in section 185, such
pronounced by judgment shall, if such predecessor was a judicial officer within the
successors in office
of Judges. meaning of Article 114(6) of the Constitution at the time such judgment
[2,3 of 1960] was written, not be deemed to be invalid by reason only of the fact that
such predecessor had no jurisdiction to write such judgment.
Requisites of 187. The judgment shall contain a concise statement of the case, the
Judgment.
points for determination, the decision thereon, and the reasons for
such decision; and the opinions of the assessors (if any) shall be
prefixed to the judgment and signed by such assessors respectively.
Decree. 188. As soon as may be after the judgment is pronounced, a formal
decree bearing the same date as the judgment shall be drawn up by
the court in the form No. 41 in the First Schedule or to the like effect,
specifying in precise words the order which is made by the judgment
in regard to the relief granted or other determination of the action. The
decree shall also state by what parties and in what proportions costs
are to be paid, and in cases in the Primary Courts shall state the
amount of such cost. The decree shall be signed by the Judge.
Amendment of 189.
Judgments, decrees
and orders. (1) The court may at any time, either on its own motion or
on that of any of the parties, correct any clerical or
arithmetical mistake in any judgment or order or any error
arising therein from any accidental slip or omission, or may
make any amendment which-is necessary to bring a
decree into conformity with the judgment.
(2) Reasonable notice of any proposed amendment under
this section shall in all cases be given to the parties or their
registered attorneys.
Requisites of 190. Where the decree relates to immovable property the property
decree relating to
immovable property.affected thereby shall be described therein by the boundaries and in
[33,20 of 1977] such other manner by reference to surveys or otherwise as may
secure, as far as possible, correctness of identification; and the
description shall be in such form as to enable such decree to be
registered under the Registration of Documents Ordinance.
Requisites of 191. When the action is for movable property, if the decree be for the
decree relating to
movable property. delivery of such property, it shall also state the amount of money to be
paid as an alternative, if delivery cannot be had.
At what rate may 192.
interest on money
be decreed. (1) When the action is for a sum of rate may interest on
[5, 53 of 1980] money due to the plaintiff, the court may, 192 of the in the
[3,6 of 1990]
decree order interest according to the rate agreed on
between the parties by the instrument sued on, or in the
absence of any such agreement at the legal rate, to be
paid, on the principal sum adjudged from the date of action
to the date of the decree, in addition to any interest
adjudged on such principal superior any period prior to the
institution of the action, with further interest at such rate on
the aggregate sum so adjudged from the date of the
decree to the date of payment, or to such earlier date as
the court thinks fit.
(2) For the purposes of this section, "the legal rate " means
the rate per centum per annum determined by the
Monetary Board established by the Monetary Law Act, by
Notification published in the Gazette, having regard to
current rates of bank interest.
(3) Where such decree is silent with regard to the payment
of further interest on such aggregate sum as aforesaid
from the date of the decree to the date of payment or other
earlier date, the court shall be deemed to have refused
such interest, and i separate action therefor shall not lie.
When may court 193. When the action is for damages for breach of contract, if it
decree specific
performance. appear that the defendant is able to perform the contract, the court,
with the consent of the plaintiff, may decree the specific performance
of the contract within a time to be fixed by the court, and in such case
shall award an amount of damages to be paid as an alternative if the
contract is not performed.
When may court 194. In all decrees for the payment of money, except money due on
decree payment by
instalments. mortgage of movable or immovable property, the court may order that
the amount decreed to be due shall be paid by instalments, with or
without interest, and the court may in its discretion impose such terms
as it may think fit as to giving security for the payments so to be made:
Provided always that on failure to pay the first or any other instalment,
the whole amount or any balance then due shall on such failure
become immediately payable;
Provided also, that if the party ordered to pay by instalments shall
appeal against the decree, and the appeal shall be decided against
him, his right to pay by instalments shall cease, and the whole amount
shall be immediately payable, unless the Court of Appeal or the
Supreme Court, as the case may be, give express direction to the
contrary;
Provided also, that no appeal shall lie against the refusal of the court
to make an order for payment by instalments.
Decree when set-off195. If the defendant shall have been allowed to set off any demand
or claim in
reconvention is against the claim of the plaintiff, the decree shall state what amount is
allowed. due to the plaintiff and what amount (if any) is due to the defendant,
and the mandatory part of the decree shall be for the recovery of any
balance which shall on that statement appear to be due to either party.
The decree of the court with respect to anything awarded to the
defendant on any matter on which the defendant obtains judgment by
set-off or in reconvention, shall be to the same effect, and be subject
to the same rules, as if such thing had been claimed by the defendant
in a separate action against the plaintiff.
Decree when claim 196. When the action is for the recovery of the possession of
in respect of mesne
profits from date of immovable property, yielding rent or other profit, the court may,
action is allowed. whenever the prayer of the plaint asks for damages in respect of
[6, 53 of 1980]
mesne profits or rent, provide in the decree for the payment of money
in lieu of mesne profits or rent in respect of such property from the
date of the institution of the action until the delivery of possession to
the party in whose favour the decree is made, with interest thereon at
such rate not exceeding twelve per centum as the court thinks fit.
Explanation
" Mesne profits " of property mean those profits
which the person in wrongful possession of such
property actually received, or might, with ordinary
diligence, have received therefrom.
Mesne profits prior 197. When the action is for the recovery of possession of immovable
to date of action.
property and for mesne profits which have accrued thereon during a
period prior to the institution of the action, the court may either
determine the amount and make an order for the payment thereof
additional to and embodied in the decree itself, or may pass a decree
for the property and reserve the inquiry into the amount of mesne
profits to be entered upon after the execution of the decree for the
property, as may appear most convenient.
Interlocutory order 198. When the action is for an account of any property and for its due
for accounts.
administration under the decree of the court, the court, before making
the final decree between the parties, shall order such accounts and
inquiries to be taken and made, and give such other directions, as it
thinks fit.
Administration by 199. In the administration by the court of the property of any person
the court.
who dies after this Ordinance comes into force, if such property proves
to be insufficient for the payment in full of his debts and liabilities, the
same rules shall be observed as to the respective rights of secured
and unsecured creditors, and as to debts and liabilities provable, and
as to the valuation of annuities and future and contingent liabilities
respectively as may be in force for the time being with respect to the
estates of persons adjudged insolvent. And all persons who in any
such case would be entitled to be paid out of such property may come
in under the decree for its administration and make such claims
against the same as they may respectively be entitled to by virtue of
this Ordinance.
Decree in action for 200. When the action is to enforce a right of pre-emption in respect of
preemption & c.
a particular sale of property, and the court finds for the plaintiff, if the
amount of purchase money has not been paid into court, the decree
shall specify a day on or before which it shall be so paid, and shall
declare that on payment of such purchase money, together with the
costs (if any) decreed against him, the plaintiff shall obtain possession
of the property, but that if such money and costs are not so paid on or
before such day or any extension thereof which shall have been
allowed for good cause shown, the action shall stand dismissed with
costs.
[Section 201 is repealed by Ordinance No. 21 of 1927]
Interlocutory order 202. When the action is for the dissolution of partnership, the court
in action for
dissolution of before making its decree may pass an order fixing the day on which
partnership. the partnership shall stand dissolved, and directing such accounts to
be taken and other acts to be done as it thinks fit.
Suit for account 203. When the action is for an account of pecuniary transactions
between principal
and agent. between principal and agent, and in all other actions not hereinbefore
provided for, where it is necessary in order to ascertain the amount of
money due to or from any party that an account should be taken, the
court shall before making its decree pass an order directing such
account to be taken as it thinks fit.
Decree or order 204. When a decree or order made at the hearing of the action is such
postponing hearing.
as to have the effect of postponing the further hearing and the final
determination of the action, as for instance a decree for the taking of
accounts, or an order for the issue of a commission to take evidence,
or of a commission to divide by metes and bounds, it shall specify the
time at which the further hearing of the action shall be proceeded with.
Persons to be 205.
entitled to certified
copies of judgment, (1) The Registrar of the court shall, where the respective
decree or parties to an action apply for a certified copy of the
proceedings in any
action judgment or final decree of the action or both, issue one
[2, 20 of 2023] certified copy of the same to each such party free of
charge.
(2) Subject to the provisions of subsection (1), the
Registrar of the court shall, upon any person-
(a) making an application accompanied by such
fee as may be determined from time to time by
the Secretary to the Ministry of the Minister
assigned the subject of Justice by Notification
published in the Gazette and supplying the
necessary stamps, furnish to such person copies
of the judgment, decree or proceedings in an
action or any part thereof; or
(b) making an application and producing the
necessary stamps, examine and certify to the
correctness of any such copies made by such
person:
Provided that, a person other than a party to a matrimonial
action, an adoption application or a custody application
shall not be entitled to obtain certified copies of any
proceedings or documents of such action or application,
except the judgment, order or decree thereof:
Provided further that, upon being satisfied as to the
requirement of an applicant who is not a party to such
matrimonial action, adoption application or custody
application, the court may direct the Registrar of such court
to issue to such applicant, certified copies of the
proceedings or documents of such action or application.
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in section 76
of the Evidence Ordinance (Chapter 14) or any other
written law, a document issued or transmitted electronically
by a court shall be deemed for the purposes of
authentication and verification, to have been signed,
sealed and dated by court, where such document-
(a) if originally created in electronic form, contains
the electronic signature and electronic seal of the
Registrar or such other officer authorized by law
to place the signature together with his name and
official title, the electronic seal of the court, and
the date; or
(b) if originally created in paper form and
converted into an electronic copy in portable
document format (PDF) or by similar file
converter technology, contains the signature and
seal of the Registrar or such other officer
authorized by law to place the signature, together
with his name and official title, the seal of the
court, and the date.
Decree or copy to 206. The decree or such certified copy thereof shall constitute the sole
be primary evidence
of decision. primary evidence of the decision or order passed by the court.
Decrees must be 207. All decrees passed by the court shall, subject to appeal, when an
decisive, and must
not direct non-suit. appeal is allowed, be final between the parties; and no plaintiff shall
hereafter be non-suited.
Explanation
Every right of property, or to money, or to
damages, or to relief of any kind which can be
claimed, set up, or put in issue between the
parties to an action upon the cause of action for
which the action is brought, whether it be actually
so claimed, set up, or put in issue or not in the
action, becomes, on the passing of the final
decree in the action, a res adjudicata, which
cannot afterwards be made the subject of action
for the same cause between the same parties.
CHAPTER XXI
OF COSTS
Costs. 208. Under the denomination of costs are included the whole of the
expenses necessarily incurred by either party on account of the action
and in enforcing the decree passed therein, such as the expense of
stamps, of summoning the defendants and witnesses, and of other
processes, or of procuring copies of documents, fees and charges of
counsel and registered attorneys, such just and reasonable charges
as appear to have been properly incurred in procuring evidence and
the attendance of witnesses, and expenses of commissioners either in
taking evidence or in local investigations, or in investigations into
accounts; and all of other expenses of procuring and adducing
necessary evidence.
Court always to 209. When disposing of any application or action under this
have Power to give
or reserve costs. Ordinance, whether of regular or of summary procedure, the court
[5,14 of 1997] may, unless elsewhere in this Ordinance otherwise directed, give to
either party, the costs of such application or action, or may reserve the
consideration of such costs for any future stage of the proceedings.
The court may in its order, fix the amount of the costs of such
application or action, so however, that the amount so fixed shall not be
less than fifty per centum of the amount of costs that may be given in
an application or action of that category, at such rates as may be
prescribed for the purposes of section 214, and not more than two
hundred per centum of the amount of costs that may be given in an
application or action of that category, at such rates as may be
prescribed for the purposes of section 214. Any order for the payment
of costs only, is a decree for money within the provisions of section
194 as to payments by instalments.
Court shall direct by210. The decree or order shall direct by whom, the costs of each party
whom costs are be
paid and estimate are to be paid, and whether in whole or in what part or proportion. The
value in certain court shall, in decrees entered in such classes of action as are
cases.
prescribed, give its estimate of the value of the action, and such
[6,14 of 1997]
estimate shall be deemed to be the value of the action, for the
purposes of applying the rates prescribed for the purposes of section
214, to that action.
Court may apportion211.
costs.
(1) The court shall have full power to give and apportion
[7,14 of 1997]
costs of every application and action in any manner it
thinks fit, and the fact that the court has no jurisdiction to
try the case is no bar to the exercise of such power:
Provided that if the court directs that the costs of any
application or action shall not follow the event, the court
shall state its reasons in writing.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers of the
court under subsection (1), the court may give costs to a
party, in the case of any frivolous or vexatious action or
application or defence by the other party or in the case of
expense to such party, occasioned by the delay or default
of the other party or by the making of any unnecessary or
unreasonable application by the other party, so however,
that the costs so ordered shall in no case exceed five
hundred per centum of the costs that may be ordered in an
application or action of that category, at the rates
prescribed for the purposes of section 214.
Set-off costs. 212. The court may direct that the costs of payable to one party by
another shall be set off against a sum which is admitted or is found in
the action to be due from the former to the latter. But such direction
shall not affect the lien upon the amount decreed of any registered
attorney in respect of the costs payable to him under the decree.
Court may give 213. The court may give interest on costs at the legal rate per annum
interest on costs.
as specified in section 192 of the Ordinance, calculated from the date
[7, 53 of 1980]
[8,14 of 1997] of the decree, and may direct that costs, with or without interest, be
paid out of, or charged upon, the subject matter of the action.
Costs to be taxed. 214. All bills of costs, whether between party and parties, or between
[9,14 of 1997]
registered attorney and client, shall be taxed by the Registrar of the
court in either case according to such rates as may be prescribed. If
either party is dissatisfied with this taxation, the matter in dispute shall
be referred to the court for its decision, and the decision of the court
(except when it is the decision of the Court of Appeal) he liable to an
appeal to the Court of Appeal.
Action for costs by 215. No registered attorney shall commence or maintain any action for
registered attorney.
the recovery of any fees, charges, or disbursements at law until the
expiration of one month or more after he shall have delivered unto the
party charged therewith, or left with him at his dwelling house or last
known place of abode, a bill of such fees, charges and disbursements
subscribed by such registered attorney. And after such delivery or
service thereof, either the registered attorney or party charged
therewith may obtain an appointment from the taxing officer for the
taxation thereof; and if either party shall fail to attend, and the taxing
officer is satisfied that such party has received due notice of the
appointment, the taxation shall proceed in his absence.
Registered attorney216. If more than one-sixth of the amount of any bill of costs is
to bear costs of
taxation in what disallowed by the taxing officer, the registered attorney shall bear the
case. expense of taxation.
CHAPTER XXII
OF EXECUTIONS
Classification of 217. A decree or order of court may command the person against
decrees.
whom it operates-
(A) to pay money;
(B) to deliver movable property;
(C) to yield up possession of immovable property;
(D) to grant, convey, or otherwise pass from himself any
right to, or interest in, any property;
(E) to do any act not falling under any one of the foregoing
heads; or it may enjoin that person-
(F) not to do a specified act, or to abstain from specified
conduct or behaviour; or it may, without affording any
substantive relief or remedy-
(G) declare a right or status.
And the method of procedure to be followed, when
necessary, by the person party to the action in whose
favour the decree or order is made, hereinafter called the
"decree-holder" or "judgment-creditor ", in order to enforce
satisfaction or execution of the decree in each case
respectively by the person party to the action against
whom the decree is made, hereinafter called " the
judgment-debtor ", is that which is next hereinafter
specified according to the above distinguishing heads.
EXECUTION OF DECREE TO PAY MONEY
Power of creditor to 218. When the decree falls under head (A) and is unsatisfied, the
seize and sell
debtor's property in judgment-creditor has the power to seize, and to sell or realize in
satisfaction decree money by the hands of the Fiscal, except as hereinafter mentioned, all
for payment of
money. saleable property, movable or immovable, belonging to the judgment-
debtor, or over which or the profits of which the judgment-debtor has a
disposing power, which he may exercise for his own benefit, and
whether the same be held by or in the name of the judgment-debtor or
by another person in trust for him or on his behalf; Provided that the
following shall not be liable to such seizure or sale, namely-
Excepted (a) the necessary wearing apparel, beds, and bedding of
property.
the judgment- debtor, or of his wife and children;
(b) tools, utensils, and implements of trade or business,
and, where the judgment-debtor is an agriculturist, his
implements of husbandry and such cattle and seed grain
as may in the opinion of the court be necessary to enable
him to earn his livelihood as such; and such quantity of
paddy as may, in the opinion of the court, be necessary for
the purpose of providing for the support of himself and his
family until the next harvest;
(c) professional instruments and library necessary for the
carrying on of the judgment-debtor's profession or
business to the value of one thousand rupees;
(d) books of accounts;
(e) mere rights to sue for damages;
(f) any right of personal service;
(g) the stipend, the cost of living allowance and the special
living allowance of a naval, military, air force, civil or
political pensioner of the Government;
[35,20 of 1977] (h) so much of the salary and allowances of a state officer
as does not in the aggregate exceed five hundred rupees
per month;
(i) the pay and allowances of persons to whom the articles
of war apply;
(j) the wages of labourers and domestic servants;
(k) an expectancy of succession by survivorship or other
merely contingent or possible right of interest;
(l) a right to future maintenance and all maintenance,
alimony and costs ordered in matrimonial suits or
maintenance actions;
(m) so much of the salary or wages and allowances of an
employee other than a state officer as does not in the
aggregate exceed five hundred rupees per month;
(n) any house which is not mortgaged as security for the
payment of the whole or part of the sum referred to in such
decree and which is the actual residence of the judgment-
debtor at the time of the execution of such decree and has
been such residence from the time of the institution of the
action in which such decree has been entered together
with such extent of land appurtenant thereto as the court
may consider necessary for its enjoyment;
(o) the amount standing to the credit of an employee's
individual account in the Employees' Provident Fund
established under the Employees' Provident Fund Act, or in
any other provident fund established for the benefit of
employees in any employment.
Explanation
The particulars mentioned in clauses (g), (h), (i),
(j), (m) and (o) are exempt from sequestration or
sale, whether before or after they are actually
payable.
Examination of 219.
judgment-debtor as
to debts owing to (1) The party entitled to enforce any decree for the
him. recovery or payment money may apply to the court for an
order that the debtor (or, in the case of a him. corporation,
that any officer thereof) be orally examined before the court
on oath or affirmation, as to whether any and what debts
are owing to the debtor, and whether the debtor has any
and what other property or means of satisfying the decree;
and the court may thereon make an order for the
attendance and examination on oath or affirmation of such
debtor or of any other person whom it thinks necessary,
and for the production by such debtor or person of any
books or documents.
(2) If a debtor for whose attendance an order has been
made under this section fails to comply with such order, the
court may, on its own motion or on the application of the
party entitled to enforce the decree, issue a warrant for the
arrest of such debtor:
Provided the court may make it a condition of the issue of
such warrant that the person applying for it shall deposit
such sum as the court may deem reasonable for the
subsistence of the debtor from the time of his arrest until
he can be brought before the court, and for the purpose of
defraying any other expenditure that may be incurred in
executing such warrant.
Application need not220. It shall not be necessary to support any such application by
to be supported by
affidavit affidavits of the applicant's belief that any debts are owing to the
debtor, or that he has any other property or means of satisfying the
decree.
Costs. 221. The costs of any such application and of any proceedings arising
there out or incidental thereto shall be in the discretion of the court.
Execution of decree222.
against legal
representative of a (1) If the decree is against a party as the legal
deceased person. representative of a deceased person, and is for money to
[8, 53 of 1980]
be paid out of the property of the deceased, it may be
executed by the attachment and sale of any such property
in the hands or under the control of the party against whom
the decree is made.
(2) If no such property can be found, and the judgment-
debtor fails to satisfy the court that he has duly applied
such property of the deceased as is proved to have come
into his possession, the decree may be executed against
the judgment-debtor to the extent of the property not duly
applied by him, in the same manner as if the decree had
been against him personally.
[8, 53 of 1980] (3) An application to execute a decree against the
judgment-debtor as provided in subsection (2) shall be
made, by petition supported by affidavit of the judgment-
creditor setting out the material facts, to which application
the judgment-debtor shall be made respondent. The court
shall after inquiry, if satisfied that the decree should be
executed against the judgment-debtor personally, grant
such application.
Seizure and sale to 223. For the purpose of effecting the required seizure and sale in any
be effected under
order of court. case the Fiscal must be put in motion by application for execution of
decree to the court which made the decree sought to be enforced.
Application therefor.224. The application for execution of the decree shall be in writing,
signed by the applicant or his registered attorney, and shall contain the
following particulars :-
(a) the number of the action;
(b) the names of the parties;
(c) the date of the decree;
(d) whether any appeal has been preferred from the
decree;
(e) whether any, and what, adjustment of the matter in
dispute has been made between the parties subsequently
to the decree;
(f) whether any, and what previous applications have been
made for execution of the decree, and with what result,
including the dates and amounts of previous levies, if any;
(g) the amount of the debt or compensation, with the
interest, if any, due upon the decree, or other relief granted
thereby;
(h) the amount of costs, if any, awarded;
(i) the name of the person against whom the enforcement
of the decree is sought;
(j) the mode in which the assistance of the court is
required, whether by the delivery of property specifically
decreed, by the arrest and imprisonment of the person
named in the application, or by the attachment of his
property, or otherwise as the nature of the relief sought
may require.
[TRUNCATED: processed first 80 of 233 pages]