PARLIAMENT OF THE DEMOCRATIC
SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF
SRI LANKA
—————————
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
ACT, No. 36 OF 2003
—————————
[Certified on 12th November, 2003]
Printed on the Order of Government
—————————
Published as a Supplement to Part II of the Gazette of the Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka of November 14, 2003
PRINTEDATTHEDEPARTMENTOFGOVERNMENTPRINTING,SRILANKA
TOBEPURCHASEDATTHEGOVERNMENTPUBLICATIONSBUREAU,COLOMBO 1
Price : Rs. 80.00 Postage : Rs. 27.00
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 1
[Certified on 12th November, 2003]
L.D.—O. 54/2002.
AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE LAW RELATING TO INTELLECTUAL
PROPERTYANDFORANEFFICIENTPROCEDUREFORTHEREGISTRATION,
CONTROLANDADMINISTRATIONTHEREOF;TO AMENDTHE CUSTOMS
ORDINANCE (CHAPTER 235) ANDTHEHIGHCOURTOFTHE PROVINCES
(SPECIAL) PROVISIONS ACT, NO. 10 OF 1996 ; ANDTOPROVIDEFOR
MATTERSCONNECTEDTHEREWITHORINCIDENTALTHERETO
BE it enacted by the Parliament of the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka as follows:—
1. This Act may be cited as the Intellectual Property Short title.
Act, No. 36 of 2003.
PART I
ADMINISTRATION
2. (1) There shall be a person to be or to act as the Appointment and
Director-General of Intellectual Property of Sri Lanka powers of the
(hereinafter referred to as the “Director-General”). Director-General.
(2) The Director-General shall—
(a) be vested with the power of implementation of the
provisions of this Act, the control and
superintendence of the registration and
administration of Industrial Designs, Patents, Marks
and of any other matter as provided by the Act, and
the supervision and control of all persons appointed
for, or engaged in, the implementation of the
provisions of this Act ; and
(b) take all necessary steps to promote and encourage
national awareness of the subject of Intellectual
Property including copyright and related rights by
organisation of exhibitions, contests, seminars and
publications and by promoting and encouraging the
establishment and proper functioning of
organisations or societies to protect and administer
copyright and related rights under Part II of the Act.
2—H 18510—10,650 (2003/05)
2 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(3) The Director-General shall comply with the general
policy of the government with respect to subject of
intellectual property and with any general or special
directions issued by the Minister in relation to such policy.
Director and 3. (1) There may from time to time be appointed a fit
Deputy Directors. and proper person or persons, to be or to act as Director of
Intellectual Property and such other Deputy Directors for
the proper implementation and administration of the
provisions of this Act.
(2) Any person so appointed may exercise, perform and
discharge any power, duty or function expressly conferred
or imposed upon the Director or the Deputy directors, as the
case may be, and may, subject to the directions of the Minister
and under the authority and control of the Director-General,
exercise, perform and discharge any powder, duty or function
conferred or imposed upon the Director-General by or under
this Act.
(3) There shall be appointed such other officers and
servants as may be necessary for the administration of the
Act.
Office and 4. (1) There shall be an office called the National
maintenance of Intellectual Property Office of Sri Lanka (hereinafter referred
registers.
to as the “Office”). Such office shall be the sole office in Sri
Lanka for the registration and administration of Industrial
designs, patents, marks and any other matter as provided by
the Act.
(2) All registers required to be kept and maintained
under the provisions of this Act shall be kept and maintained
under the supervision of the Director-General at the Office
and such registers shall be the only legally recognized
registers in Sri Lanka for the registration of industrial designs,
patents, marks and any other matter as provided by the Act.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 3
PART II
CHAPTER I
COPYRIGHT
5. For the purposes of this Part— Interpretation.
“audiovisual work” means a work that consists of a
series of related images which impart the
impression of motion, with or without
accompanying sounds, susceptible of being made
visible, and where accompanied by sounds
susceptible of being made audible ;
“author” means the physical person who has created
the work ;
“broadcasting” means the communication of a work,
a performance or a sound recording to the public
by wireless transmission, including transmission
by satellite ;
“collective work” means a work created by two or more
physical persons at the initiative and under the
direction of a physical person or legal entity, with
the understanding that it will be disclosed by the
latter person or entity under his or its own name
and that the identity of the contributing physical
persons will not be indicated ;
“communication to the public” means the transmission
to the public by wire or without wire of the images
or sounds, or both, of a work, a performance or a
sound recording including the making available
to the public of a work, performance or sound
recording in such a way that members of the public
may access them from a place and at a time
individually chosen by them ;
4 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
“computer” means an electronic or similar device
having information processing capabilities ;
“computer program” is a set of instructions expressed
in words, codes, schemes or in any other form,
which is capable, when incorporated in a medium
that the computer can read, of causing a computer
to perform or achieve a particular task or result ;
“economic rights” means the rights referred to in
section9;
“expression of folklore” means a group oriented and
tradition based creation of groups or individuals
reflecting the expectation of the community as an
adequate expression of its cultural and social
identity, its standards and values as transmitted
orally, by imitation or by other means, including:
(a) folktales, folk poetry, and folk riddles ;
(b) folk songs and instrumental folk music ;
(c) folk dances and folk plays ;
(d) productions of folk arts in particular,
drawings, paintings, carvings, sculptures,
pottery, terracotta, mosaic, woodwork,
metalware, jewellery, handicrafts, costumes,
and indigenous textiles ;
“infringement” means an act that violated any right
protected under this Part ;
“moral rights” means rights referred to in section 10;
“performers” means singers, musicians, and other
persons who sing, deliver, declaim, play in, or
otherwise perform, literary or artistic works or
expressions of folklore ;
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 5
“photographic work” means the recording of light or
other radiation on any medium on which an image
is produced or from which an image may be
produced, irrespective of the technique (chemical,
electronic or other) by which such recording is
made, a still picture extracted from an audiovisual
work shall not be considered a “photographic
work” but a part of the audiovisual work
concerned;
“producer” of an audiovisual work or a sound recording
means the physical person or legal entity that
undertakes the initiative and responsibility for the
making of the audiovisual work or sound
recording;
“public display” means the showing of the original or
a copy of a work—
(a) directly ;
(b) by means of a film, slide, television image
or otherwise on screen ;
(c) by means of any other device or process ;or
(d) in the case of an audiovisual work, the
showing of individual images
nonsequentially at a place or places where
persons outside the normal circle of a family
and its closest social acquaintances are or
can be present, irrespective of whether they
are or can be present at the same place and
time or at different places or times, and where
the work can be displayed without
communication to the public within the
meaning of the definition of the expression
“Communication to the Public”;
“public lending” means the transfer of the possession
of the original or a copy of a work or a sound
recording for a limited period of time for non-
profit making purposes, by an institution, the
services of which are available to the public, such
as a public library or archives ;
6 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
“public performance” means—
(a) in the case of a work other than an
audiovisual work, the recitation, playing,
dancing, acting or otherwise performing the
work in public either directly or by means
of any device or process ;
(b) in the case of an audiovisual work, the
showing of images in sequence or the
making of accompanying sound audible in
public ; and
(c) in the case of a sound recording, making
the recording sounds audible at a place or
at places where persons outside the normal
circle of the family and its closest
acquaintances are or can be present,
irrespective of whether they are or can be
present at the same place and time, or at
different places or times, and where the
performance can be perceived without the
need for communication to the public within
the meaning of the definition of the
expression“communication to the public” ;
“published” means a work or a sound recording—
(a) copies of which have been made available
to the public in a reasonable quantity for sale,
rental, public lending or for transfer of the
ownership or the possession of the copies;
or
(b) which has been made available to the public
by means of an electronic system :
Provided that, in the case of a work, the
making available to the public took place with
the consent of the owner of the copyright, and
in the case of a sound recording, with the
consent of, the producer of the sound
recording or his successor in title ;
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 7
“rental” means the transfer of the possession of the
original or a copy of a work or sound recording
for a limited period of time for profit making
purposes;
“reproduction” means the making of one or more
copies of a work or sound recording in any
material form, including any permanent or
temporary storage of a work or sound recording
in electronic form ;
“sound recording” means any exclusively aural fixation
of the sounds of a performance or of other sounds,
regardless of the method by which the sounds are
fixed or the medium in which the sounds are
embodied ; it does not include a fixation of sounds
and images, such as the sounds incorporated in
an audiovisual work ;
“work” means any literary, artistic or scientific work
referred to in section 6 ;
“work of applied art” means an artistic creation with
utilitarian functions or incorporated in a useful
article, whether made by hand or produced on an
industrial scale ;
“work of joint authorship” means a work to the creation
of which two or more authors have contributed,
provided the work does not qualify as “a collective
work”.
6. (1) The following works shall be protected as literary, Works protected.
artistic or scientific work (hereinafter referred to as “works”)
which are original intellectual creations in the literary, artistic
and scientific domain, including and in particular—
(a) books, pamphlets, articles, computer programs and
other writings ;
(b) speeches, lectures, addresses, sermons and other
oral works ;
8 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(c) dramatic, dramatic-musical works, pantomimes,
choreographic works and other works created for
stage productions ;
(d) stage production of works specified in paragraph
(c) and expressions of folklore that are apt for such
productions ;
(e) musical works, with or without accompanying
words;
(f) audiovisual works ;
(g) works of architecture ;
(h) works of drawing, painting, sculpture, engraving,
litho-graphy, tapestry and other works of fine art ;
(j) photographic works ;
(k) works of applied art ;
(l) illustrations, maps, plans, sketches and three
dimensional works relative to geography,
topography, architecture or science.
(2) The works specified in subsection (1) of this section
shall be protected by the sole fact of their creation and
irrespective of their mode or form of expression, as well as
of their content, quality and purpose.
Derivative works. 7. (1) The following shall also be protected as works:—
(a) translations, adaptations, arrangements and other
transformations or modifications of works ; and
(b) collections of works and collections of mere data
(data bases), whether in machine readable or other
form, provided that such collections are original
by reason of the selection, co-ordination or
arrangement of their contents.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 9
(2) The protection of any work referred to in subsection
(1) shall be without prejudice to any protection of a pre-
existing work incorporated in, or utilized for, the making of
such a work.
8. Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 6 and 7, Works not
no protection shall be extended under this Part — protected.
(a) to any idea, procedure, system, method of operation,
concept, principle, discovery or mere data, even if
expressed, described, explained, illustrated or
embodied in a work ;
(b) to any official text of a legislative, administrative
or legal nature, as well as any official translation
thereof;
(c) to news of the day published, broadcast, or publicly
communicated by any other means.
9. (1) Subject to the provisions of sections 11 to 13 the Economic rights.
owner of copyright of a work shall have the exclusive right
to carry out or to authorize the following acts in relation to
the work —
(a) reproduction of the work ;
(b) translation of the work ;
(c) adaptation, arrangement or other transformation of
the work ;
(d) the public distribution of the original and each copy
of the work by sale, rental, export or otherwise ;
(e) rental of the original or a copy of an audiovisual
work, a work embodied in a sound recording, a
computer program, a data base or a musical work
in the form of notation, irrespective of the ownership
of the original or copy concerned ;
10 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(f) importation of copies of the work, (even where the
imported copies were made with the authorization
of the owner of the copyright) ;
(g) public display of the original or a copy of the work;
(h) public performance of the work ;
(j) broadcasting of the work ; and
(k) other communication to the public of the work.
(2) The provisions of subsection (1) of this section shall
apply to both the entire work and a substantial part thereof.
(3) The rights of rental in terms of paragraph (e) of
subsection (1) shall not apply to rental of computer programs
where the program itself is not the essential object of the rental.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (d) of
subsection (1), the owner of a work or a copy of a work
lawfully made or any person authorized in that behalf by
such owner, is entitled without the authority of the owner of
the copyright, to sell or otherwise dispose of that copy.
Moral Rights. 10. (1) The author of a work shall independently of
his economic rights and even where he is no longer the owner
of those economic rights, have the following rights:—
(a) to have his name indicated prominently on the
copies and in connection with any public use of his
work, as far as practicable ;
(b) the right to use a pseudonym and not have his name
indicated on the copies and in connection with any
public use of his work ;
(c) to object to any distortion, mutilation or other
modification of, or other derogatory action in
relation to, his work which would be prejudicial to
his honour or reputation.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 11
(2) No right mentioned in subsection (1) shall be
transmissible during the life time of the author, however on
the death of the author, the right to exercise any of those
rights shall be transmissible by testamentary disposition or
by operation of law.
(3) The author may waive any of the moral rights
mentioned in subsection (1), provided that such a waiver is
in writing and clearly specifies the right or rights waived
and the circumstances to which the waiver applies :
Provided that where any waiver of the rights under
paragraph (c) of subsection (1) specifies the nature and extent
of the modification or other action in respect of which the
right is waived, subsequent to the death of the author, the
physical person or legal entity upon whom or which the moral
rights have devolved shall have the right to waive the said
rights.
11. (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection Fair use.
(1) of section 9, the fair use of a work, including such use by
reproduction in copies or by any other means specified by
that section, for purposes such as criticism, comment, news
reporting, teaching (including multiple copies for classroom
use), scholarship or research, shall not be an infringement
of copyright.
(2) The following factors shall be considered in
determining whether the use made of a work in any particular
case is fair use:—
(a) the purpose and character of the use, including
whether such use is of a commercial nature or is
for non-profit educational purposes ;
(b) the nature of the copyrighted work ;
(c) the amount and substantiality of the portion used
in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole ; and
(d) the effect of the use upon the potential market for,
or value of, the copyrighted work.
12 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(3) The acts of fair use shall include the circumstances
specified in section 12.
Act of fair use. 12. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in
paragraph (a) of subsection (1) of section 9 and subject to
the provisions of subsection (2) of this section, the private
reproduction of a published work in a single copy shall be
permitted without the authorization of the owner of the
copyright, where the reproduction is made by a physical
person from a lawful copy of such work exclusively for his
own personal purposes.
(2) The permission under subsection (1) of this section
shall not be extended to the reproduction—
(a) of a work of architecture in the form of a building
or other constructions ;
(b) in the form of reprography of the whole or a
substantial part of a book or of a musical work in
the form of notations ;
(c) of the whole or a substantial part of a data base ;
(d) of a computer program, except as provided in
subsection (7) ; and
(e) of any work, in case the reproduction would conflict
with a normal exploitation of the work or would
otherwise unreasonably prejudice the legitimate
interests of the owner of the copyright.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (a) of
subsection (1) of section 9, the reproduction, in the form of
a quotation, of a short part of a published work shall be
permitted without authorization of the owner of copyright :
Provided that the reproduction is compatible with fair
practice and does not exceed the extent justified by the
purpose of such reproduction. The quotation shall be
accompanied by an indication of the source and the name of
the author, if his name appears in the work from which the
quotation is taken.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 13
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of parargraph (a)
of subsection (1) of section 9, the following acts shall be
permitted without the authorization of the owner of the
copyright :—
(a) the reproduction of a short part of a published work
for teaching purposes by way of illustration, in
writing or sound or visual recordings, provided that
the reproduction is compatible with fair practice
and does not exceed the extent justified by the
purpose of such reproduction;
(b) the reprographic reproduction for face to face
teaching in any educational institution the activities
of which do not serve direct or indirect commercial
gain, of published articles, other short works or short
extracts of works, to the extent justified by the
purpose, provided that the act of reproduction is an
isolated one occurring, if repeated, on separate and
unrelated occassions :
Provided however the source of the work
reproduced and the name of the author shall be
indicated as far as practicable on all copies made
under this subsection.
(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (a) of
subsection (1) of section 9, any library or archives, whose
activities do not serve any direct or indirect commercial gain
may, without the authorization of the owner of copyright,
make a single copy of the work by reprographic
reproduction—
(a) where the work reproduced is a published article,
other short work or short extract of a work, and
where the purpose of the reproduction is to satisfy
the request of a physical person :
Provided that—
(i) the library or archives is satisfied that the
copy will be used solely for the purposes of
study, scholarship or private research,
14 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(ii) the act of reproduction is an isolated
occurance, occurring if repeated, on
separate and unrelated occasions ;
(b) where the copy is made in order to preserve and, if
necessary replace a copy, or to replace a copy which
has been lost, destroyed or rendered unusable in
the permanent collection of another similar library
or archives :
Provided that it is not possible to obtain such a
copy under reasonable conditions ; and
Provided further, that the act of reprographic
reproduction is an isolated occurance occurring if
repeated, on separate and unrelated occasions.
(6) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (a),
(h) and (j) of subsection (1) of section 9, and subject to the
condition that the source and the name of the author is
indicated as far as practicable, the following acts shall be
permitted in respect of a work without the authorization of
the owner of copyright—
(a) the reproduction in a newspaper or periodical,
manner of broadcasting or other manner of
communication to the public, of an article published
in a newspaper or periodical on current economic,
political or religious topics or a broadcast or
communication relating to the same, and such
permission shall not apply where the right to
authorize reproduction, broadcasting or other
communication to the public is expressly reserved
on the copies, by the owner of copyright, or in
connection with broadcasting or other
communication to the public of the work ;
(b) for the purpose of reporting current events, the
reproduction and the broadcasting or other
communication to the public of short excerpts of a
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 15
work seen or heard in the course of such events, to
the extent that it is justified by the purpose of such
reproduction;
(c) the reproduction in a newspaper or periodical,
broadcasting or other manner of communication to
the public, of a political speech, a lecture, address,
sermon or other work of a similar nature delivered
in public, or a speech delivered during legal
proceedings, to the extent that it is justified by
reason of the fact of providing current information.
(7) (a) Notwithstanding anything contained in
paragraphs(a) and (c) of subsection (1) of section 9,
reproduction in a single copy or the adaptation of a computer
program by the lawful owner of a copy of that computer
programe, shall be permitted without the authorization of
the owner of copyright provided that the copy or adaptation
is necessary—
(i) for use of the computer program with a computer
for the purpose and extent for which the computer
program has been obtained ;
(ii) for archival purposes and for replacement of the
lawfully owned copy of the computer program in
the event that the said copy of the computer program
is lost, destroyed or rendered unusable.
(b) No copy or adaptation of a computer program shall
be used for any purpose other than those specified in
paragraph (a), and any such copy or adaptation shall be
destroyed in the event that continued possession of the copy
of the computer program ceases to be lawful.
(8) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (f) of
subsection (1) of section 9, the importation of a copy of a
work by a physical person for his own personal purposes
shall be permitted without the authorization of the owner of
copyright.
16 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in paragraph
(g) of subsection (1) of section 9, the public display of
originals or copies of works shall be permitted without the
authorization of the owner of copyright :
Provided that the display is made other than by means of
a film, slide, television image or otherwise on screen or by
means of any other device or process :
Provided further, the work has been published or the
original or the copy displayed has been sold, given away or
otherwise transferred to another person by the author or his
successor in title.
(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part,
the following shall not be an infringement of copyright :–
(a) the performance or display of a work for educational
or teaching purposes by government or non profit
educational institutions, in classrooms or similar
places set aside for education :
Provided that, in the case of an audiovisual work,
the performance or the display of individual images,
is given by means of a lawfully made copy, or the
person responsible for the performance did not know
or had no reason to believe that the copy was not
lawfully made.
(b) the communication of a transmission embodying a
performance or display of a work by the public
reception of the transmission on a single receiving
apparatus, of a kind commonly used in private
homes, unless –
(i) a direct charge is made to see or hear the
transmission ; or
(ii) the transmission thus received is further
transmitted to the public.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 17
13. (1) Subject to the provisions of subsections (2), (3), Duration of
(4) and (5), the economic and moral rights shall be protected copyright.
during the life time of the author and for a further period of
seventy years from the date of his death.
(2) In the case of a work of joint authorship, the
economic and moral rights shall be protected during the
life of the last surviving author and for a further period of
seventy years from the date of the death of the last surviving
author.
(3) In the case of a collective work, other than a work
of applied art, and in the case of an audiovisual work, the
economic and moral rights shall be protected for seventy
years from the date on which the work was first published,
or failing publication within seventy years from the making
of the work.
(4) In the case of a work published anonymously or
under a pseudonym, the economic and moral rights shall be
protected for seventy years from the date on which the work
was first published :
Provided that, where the author’s identity is revealed or
is no longer in doubt before the expiration of the said period,
the provisions of subsection (1) or subsection (2) shall apply,
as the case may require.
(5) In the case of work of applied art, the economic and
moral rights shall be protected for twenty-five years from
the date of the making of the work.
(6) Every period provided for under the preceding
subsections shall run to the end of the calendar year in which
it would otherwise expire.
14. (1) Subject to the provisions of subsections (2), (3), Original
(4) and (5), of this section, the author who created the work ownership of
economic rights.
shall be the original owner of economic rights.
18 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(2) In respect of a work of joint authorship, the co-
authors shall be the original owners of the economic rights.
If, however, a work of joint authorship consists of parts that
can be used separately and the author of each part can be
identified, the author of each part shall be the original owner
of the economic rights in respect of the part that he has
created.
(3) In respect of a collective work, the physical person
or legal entity at the initiative, and under the direction, of
whom or which the work has been created shall be the
original owner of the economic rights.
(4) In respect of a work created by an author employed
by a physical person or legal entity in the course of his
employment, the original owner of the economic rights shall,
unless provided otherwise by way of a contract, be the
employer. If the work is created pursuant to a commission,
the original owner of economic rights shall be, unless
otherwise provided in a contract, the person who
commissioned the work.
(5) In respect of an audiovisual work, the original owner
of the economic rights shall be the producer, unless otherwise
provided in a contract. The co-authors of the audiovisual
work and the authors of the pre-existing works, included in,
or adapted for, the making of the audiovisual work shall,
however, maintain their economic rights in their contributions
or pre-existing works, respectively, to the extent that those
contributions or pre existing works can be the subject of
acts covered by their economic rights separately from the
audiovisual work.
Presumption of 15. (1) The physical person whose name is indicated
authorship and of as the author on a work in the usual manner shall, in the
representation of absence of proof to the contrary, be presumed to be the author
the author.
of the work. The provisions of this section shall be applicable
even if the name is a pseudonym, where the pseudonym
leaves no doubt as to the identity of the author.
(2) The physical person or legal entity whose name
appears on an audio-visual work shall, in the absence of
proof to the contrary, be presumed to be the producer of the
said work.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 19
16. (1) The owner of a copyright may - Assignment or
licence of
author’s rights.
(a) grant licence to a physical person or legal entity to
carry out all or any of the acts relating to the
economic rights referred to in section 9 ;
(b) assign or transfer in whole or any part of the
economic rights referred to in section 9.
(2) Any assignment or transfer of an economic right,
and any licence to do such an act subject to authorization by
the owner of the copyright, shall be in writing signed by the
assignor and the assignee, transferor and the transferee or
by the licensor and the licensee, as the case may be.
(3) An assignment or transfer in whole or in part of any
economic right, or a licence to do an act subject to
authorization by the owner of copyright, shall not include or
be deemed to include the assignment or transfer or licence
in respect of any other rights not expressly referred to therein.
CHAPTER II
RELATED RIGHTS
[PROTECTIONOFRIGHTSOFPERFORMERS,PRODUCERSOFSOUND
RECORDINGANDBROADCASTINGORGANIZATION]
17. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 21, a Rights requiring
performer shall have exclusive right to carry out or to authorization of
authorize any of the following acts :— performers.
(a) the broadcasting or other communication to the
public of his performance or a substantial part
thereof, except where the broadcasting, or the other
communication—
(i) is made from a fixation of the performance,
other than a fixation made in terms of section
21 ; or
20 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(ii) is a re-broadcasting, made or authorized by
the organisation initially broadcasting the
performance or substantial part thereof ;
(b) the fixation of his unfixed performance or
substantial part thereof ;
(c) the reproduction of a fixation of his performance
or substantial part thereof.
(2) Once the performer has authorized the incorporation
of his performance in a audiovisual fixation, the provisions
of subsection (1) shall have no further application.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be construed to deprive
performers of the right to enter into contracts in respect of
their performances on terms and conditions more favourable
to them.
(4) The rights under this section shall be protected from
the moment the performance takes place until the end of
the fiftieth calendar year following the year in which the
performance takes place.
Rights of 18. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 21, a
producers of producer of a sound recording shall have the exclusive right
sound recordings. to carry out or to authorise any of the following acts :—
(a) the direct or indirect reproduction of the sound
recording or substantial part thereof ;
(b) the importation of copies of the sound recording or
a substantial part thereof even where such imported
copies were made with the authorisation of the
producer ;
(c) the adaptation or other transformation of the sound
recording or a substantial part thereof ;
(d) the rental of a copy of the sound recording or a
substantial part thereof, irrespective of the
ownership of the copy rented ;
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 21
(e) the sale or offering for sale to the public of the
original or copies of the sound recording or
substantial part thereof.
(2) The rights under subsection (1) of this section shall
be protected from the date of publication of the sound
recording until the end of the fiftieth calendar year following
the year of publication, or if the sound recording has not
been published, from the date of fixation of the sound
recording until the end of fiftieth calendar year following
the year of fixation.
19. (1) where a sound recording published for commercial Equitable
purposes, or a reproduction of such sound recording, is used remuneration for
use of sound
directly for broadcasting or other form of communication to
recordings.
the public, or is publicly performed, a single equitable
remuneration for the performer or performers and the producer
of the sound recording shall be paid by the user.
(2) Unless otherwise agreed between the performer or
the producer, half of the sum received by the producer under
subsection (1) shall be paid by the producer to any performer.
(3) The right to an equitable remuneration under this
section shall subsist from the date of publication of the sound
recording until the end of the fiftieth calendar year following
the year of publication, or if the sound recording has not
been published, from the date of fixation of the sound
recording until the end of the fiftieth calendar year following
the year of fixation.
20. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 21, a Rights of
broadcasting organisation shall have the exclusive right to broadcasting
carry out or to authorize any of followings acts :— organisation.
(a) the re-broadcasting of its broadcast or a substantial
part thereof;
(b) the communication to the public of its broadcast or
a substantial part thereof ;
22 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(c) the fixation of its broadcast or a substantial part
thereof ;
(d) the reproduction of a fixation of its broadcast or a
substantial part thereof.
(2) The rights under this section shall be protected from
the moment when the broadcasting takes place until the end
of the fiftieth calender year following the year in which
broadcast takes place.
Limitations on 21. Sections 17, 18, 19 and 20 shall not apply where
protection. the acts referred to in those sections are related to—
(a) the use by a physical person exclusively for his own
personal purposes ;
(b) using short excerpts for reporting current events to
the extent justified by the purpose of providing
current information ;
(c) use solely for the purpose of face to face teaching
activities or for scientific research ;
(d) cases where, under copyright, a work can be used
without the authorization of the owner of copyright.
Enforcement of 22. (1) Any person who infringes or is about to infringe
rights and any of the rights protected under this Part may be prohibited
disputes
from doing so by way of an injunction and be liable to
resolution.
damages. The owner of such rights is entitled to seek such
other remedy as the court may deem fit.
(2) (a) The Court shall have power and jurisdiction—
(i) to grant such injunctions to prohibit the
commission of any act of, infringement or
the continued commission of such acts of
infringment of any right protected under
this Part ;
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 23
(ii) to order the impounding of copies of works
or sound recordings suspected of being made
sold, rented or imported without the
authorization of the owner of any right
protected under this Part where the making,
selling, renting or importation of copies is
subject to such authorization, as well as the
impounding of the packaging of, the
implements that could be used for the
making of, and the documents, accounts or
business papers, referring to, such copies.
(b) The Court shall in addition have the jurisdiction to
order the payment by the infringer, of damages for the loss
suffered as a consequence of the act of infringement, as well
as the payment of expenses caused by the infringement,
including legal costs. The amount of damages shall be fixed
taking into account inter alia, the importance of the material
and moral prejudice suffered by the owner of the right, as
well as the importance of the infringer’s profits attributable
to the infringement. Where the infringer did not know or
had no reasonable cause to know that he or it was engaged
in infringing activity, the court may limit damages to the
profits of the infringer attributable to the infringement or to
pre established damages.
(c) The Court shall have the authority to order the
destruction or other reasonable manner of disposing of copies
made in infringement of any right protected under this Part
if available and their packaging outside the channels of
commerce in such a manner as would avoid harm to the
owner of the rights, unless he requests otherwise. The
provisions of this section shall not be applicable to copies
and their packaging which were acquired by a third party in
good faith.
(d) Where there is a danger that implements may be used
to commit or continue to commit acts of infringement, the
Court shall, whenever and to the extent that it is reasonable,
order their destruction or other reasonable manner of disposing
of the same outside the channels of commerce in such a manner
as to minimize the risks of further infringements, including
surrender to the owner of the rights.
24 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(e) Where there is a danger that acts of infringement
may be continued, the court shall make such orders as may
be necessary prevent such acts being committed.
(f) The provisions of Chapter XXXV of this Act relating
to infringement and remedies shall apply, mutatis mutandis,
to rights protected under this Part.
(g) Any person who infringes or attempts to infringe
any of the rights protected under this Part shall be guilty of
an offence and on conviction be liable to any penalty as
provided for in Chapters XXXVIII and XLI of the Act.
(3) (a) The Director-General may on an application
being made in the prescribed form and manner by a person
aggrieved by any of his rights under this Part being infringed
or in any other manner affected, and after such inquiry as he
thinks fit determine any question that may be necessary or
expedient to determine in connection with such application
and such decision shall be binding on the parties subject to
the provisions of paragraph (b) of this subsection.
(b) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Director-General may make an appeal to the Court and unless
the Court issues an interim order staying the operation of
the decision of the Director-General, such decision shall
continue to be in force until the matter is decided by the
Court.
Measures, 23. (1) The following acts shall be considered unlawful
remedies and and in the application of section 22 shall be assimilated to
sanctions against infringements of the rights of the owner of copyright :—
abuses in respect
of technical
means. (i) the manufacture or importation for sale or rental of
any device or means specifically designed or
adapted to circumvent any device or means intended
to prevent or restrict reproduction of a work or to
impair the quality of copies made (the latter device
or means hereinafter referred to as “copy protection
or copy management device or means”) ;
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 25
(ii) the manufacture or importation for sale or rental of
any device or means that is susceptible to enable or
assist the reception of an encrypted program, which
is broadcast or otherwise communicated to the
public, including reception by satellite, by those
who are not entitled to receive the program.
(2) In the application of section 22, any illicit device
and means mentioned in subsection (1) of this section shall
be assimilated to infringing copies of works.
(3) The owner of copyright in a work shall also be
entitled to the damages for infringement provided for in
section 22 where—
(a) authorized copies of the work have been made and
offered for sale or rental in an electronic form
combined with a copy protection or copy
management device or means, and a device or
means specifically designed or adapted to
circumvent the said device or means, made or
imported for sale or rental ;
(b) the work is aurhorised for inclusion in an encrypted
program, broadcast or otherwise communicated to
the public, including by satellite, and a device or
means enabling or assisting the reception of the
program by those who are not entitled to receive
the program made or imported, for sale or rental.
24. (1) Subject to the provision of subection (4) of this Protection of
section expressions of folklore shall be protected against— expressions of
folklore and
damages.
(a) reproduction ;
(b) communication to the public by performance,
broadcasting, distribution by cable or other means;
(c) adaptation, translation and other transformation,
when such expressions are made either for
commercial purposes or outside their traditional or
customary context.
26 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(2) The rights conferred by subsection (1) of this section
shall not apply where the acts referred to therein are related
to –
(a) the use by a physical person exclusively for his own
personal purposes ;
(b) using short excerpts for reporting current events to
the extent justified by the purpose of providing
current information ;
(c) the use solely for the purpose of face to face teaching
or for scientific research ;
(d) instances referred to in sections 11 and 12, where a
work can be used without the authorization of the
owner of copyright.
(3) In all printed publications, and in connection with
any communication to the public of any identifiable
expression of folklore, its source shall be indicated in an
appropriate manner and in conformity with fair practice by
mentioning the community or place from where the
expression utilized has been derived.
(4) The right to authorize acts referred to in subsection
(1) of this section shall subject to the payment of a prescribed
fee, vest in a Competent authority to be determined by the
Minister.
(5) The money collected under subsection (4) shall be
used for purposes of cultural development.
(6) Any person who, without the permission of the
Competent Authority referred to in subsection (4), uses an
expression of folklore in a manner not permitted by this
section shall be in contravention of the provisions of this
section and shall be liable to damages, and be subject to an
injunctions and any other remedy as the Court may deem fit
to award in the circumstances.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 27
25. (1) (a) No person or body of persons corporate or Registration of
unincorporate shall, after the coming into operation of this society,
administration of
Act, commence or carry on the business of issuing or granting
rights by societies,
licences in respect of any right protected under this Part
control over the
except under or in accordance with, the provisions of rights and
paragraph (c) of this subsection : submission of
report.
Provided that the owner of such right shall, in his
individual capacity, continue to have the right to grant
licences in respect of his own rights. Where such owner is a
member of a society registered under this section the grant
of such licences shall be consistent with his obligations as a
member of such society.
(b) Any body of persons corporate or unincorporate
which fulfils such conditions as may be prescribed, apply to
the Director-General for permission to engage in the business
specified in paragraph (a) and register the society.
(c) The Director-General may having regard to the
interests of the owners of the rights protected under this Part,
the interests and convenience of the public and in particular
of the groups of persons who are most likely to seek licences
in respect of relevant rights and the ability and professional
competence of the applicant to grant permission to
commence or carry on business specified in paragraph (a)
of subsection (1) and register such person or body of persons
as a collective society subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed :
Provided that the Director-General shall not ordinarily
register more than one such society to do business in respect
of the same class of rights.
(d) The Director-General may, if he is satisfied that the
society is being managed in a manner detrimental to the
interests of the owners of rights concerned, cancel or suspend
the registration of the society and the permission to
commence or carry on business as specified in paragraph
(a) of this subsection, after such inquiry as may be necessary.
28 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(e) The Director-General may by order cancel or suspend
the registration of such society and the permission to carry
on business pending inquiry for such period not exceeding
one year as may be specified in such order under paragraph
(d) of this subseciton.
(f) Where the Director-General suspends the registration
of a society, he shall thereupon appoint an administrator to
carry out the functions of the society.
(2) (a) Subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed—
(i) a society may accept from an owner of the
rights exclusive authorization to administer any
right under this Part by the issue of licences or
collection of licence fees or both ; and
(ii) an owner of the rights shall have the right to
withdraw such authorization without prejudice
to the rights of the society under any contract
between such owner and society.
(b) It shall be competent for a society to enter into any
agreement with any foreign society or organization
administering rights corresponding to the rights protected
under this Part, and to entrust to such foreign society or
organization the administration in any foreign country of
rights administered by the said society in Sri Lanka, or for
administering in Sri Lanka the rights administered in a
foreign country by such foreign society or organization :
Provided that no such society or organization shall permit
any discrimination in regard to the terms of a licence or the
distribution of fees collected in connection with the rights
protected under this Part and in such foreign country.
(c) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, a
society may –
(i) issue licences in respect of any rights protected
under this Part;
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 29
(ii) collect fees in pursuance of such licences ;
(iii) distribute such fees among owners of rights after
making deductions for its own expenses ;
(iv) perform any other functions consistent with the
provisions of subsection (4).
(3) (a) Every society shall be subject to the collective
control of the owners of rights under this Part whose rights
are administered in such a manner as may be prescribed in
order to—
(i) obtain the approval of such owners of rights for its
procedures of collection and distribution of fees;
(ii) obtain their approval for the utilization of any
amounts collected as fees for any purpose other
than distribution to the owner of rights ; and
(iii) provide to such owners regular, full and detailed
information concerning all its activities, in relation
to the administration of their rights.
(b) All fees distributed among the owners of rights shall,
as far as may be, be distributed in proportion to the actual
use of their works.
(4) (a) Every Society shall submit to the Director-
General such returns as may be prescribed.
(b) The Director-General may call for any report or
records of any society for the purpose of satisfying himself
that the fees collected by the society in respect of the rights
administered by it are being utilized or distributed in
accordance with the provisions of this Part.
26. (1) The provisions of this Part in respect of the Scope of
protection of literary, artistic or scientific works shall apply application.
to—
(a) works of authors who are nationals of , or have their
habitual residence in, Sri Lanka ; and
30 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(b) works first published in Sri Lanka, works first
published in another country and hereupon
published in Sri Lanka, within thirty days from such
publication, irrespective of the nationality or
residence of the author.
(2) The provisions of this Part shall also apply to works
that are protected in Sri Lanka by virtue of, and in accordance
with, any international convention or any international
agreement to which Sri Lanka is a party.
Protection of 27. (1) The provisions of this Part in respect of
performers. protection of performers shall apply to—
(a) performers who are nationals of Sri Lanka ;
(b) performers who are not nationals of Sri Lanka but
whose performances :—
(i) take place on the territory of Sri Lanka ; or
(ii) are incorporated in sound recordings that are
protected under this Part ; or
(iii) have not been fixed in a sound recording but
are included in broadcasts qualifying for
protection under this Part.
(2) The provisions of this Part on the protection of sound
recodings, shall apply to—
(a) sound recordings the producers of which, are
nationals of Sri Lanka ;
(b) sound recordings first fixed in Sri Lanka ; and
(c) sound recordings first published in Sri Lanka.
(3) The provisions of this Part on the protection of
broadcasts shall apply to—
(a) broadcasts of broadcasting organisations where the
registered office of such organisations are situated
in Sri Lanka; and
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 31
(b) broadcasts transmitted from transmitters situated
in Sri Lanka.
(4) The provisions of this Part shall in addition apply to
performers, producers of sound recordings and broadcasting
orgainsations protected by virtue of, and in accordance with,
any international convention or any international agreement
to which Sri Lanka is a party.
PART III
CHAPTER III
INDUSTRIAL DESIGNS
SCOPEOFTHISPARTANDDEFINITIONS
28. The protection of industrial designs provided under Conditions for
this Part shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any protection.
other protection provided under any other written law, in
particular under Part II of this Act.
29. The protection provided under this Part shall— Scope of this Part.
(a) apply only to new industrial designs ;
(b) not apply to an industrial design which consists
of any scandalous design or is contrary to morality
or public order or public interest or which, in the
opinion of the Director-General or of any Court
to which such matter has been referred to is likely
to offend the religious or racial susceptibilities of
any community.
30. For the purposes of this Part any composition of Definition of
lines or colours or any three dimensional form, whether or industrial design.
not associated with lines or colours, that gives a special
appearance to a product of industry or handicraft and is
capable of serving as a pattern for a product of industry or
handicraft shall be deemed to be an industrial design :
32 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
Provided that anything in an industrial design which serves
solely to obtain a technical result shall not be protected under
this Part.
Definition of 31. (1) For the purpose of this Part a new industrial
novelty. design means an industrial design which had not been made
available to the public anywhere in the world and at any
time whatsoever through description, use or in any other
manner before the date of an application for registration of
such industrial design or before the priority date validly
claimed in respect thereof.
(2) An industrial design shall not be deemed to have
been made available to the public solely by reason of the
fact that, within the period of six months preceding the filing
of an application for registration, it had been a displaly at
an official or officially recognized, international exhibition.
(3) An industrial design shall not be considered a new
industrial design solely by reason of the fact that it differs
from an earlier industrial design in minor respects or that it
concerns a type of product different from a product
embodying an earlier industrial design.
CHAPTER IV
RIGHTTO PROTECTIONOF INDUSTRIAL DESIGN
Ownership and 32. (1) The right to obtain protection of an industrial
right to protection design belongs to its owner.
of industrial
design.
(2) Subject to provisions of section 34, the owner of an
industrial design or his successor in title is its creator .
(3) Where two or more persons have jointly created an
industrial design, the right to obtain protection shall belong
to them jointly :
Provided that a person who has merely assisted in the
creation of an industrial design but has made no contribution
of a creative nature shall not be deemed to be the creator or
a co-creator of such industrial design.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 33
(4) Subject to the provisions of sections 33 and 34 the
person who makes the first application for the registration
of an industrial design or the person who first validly claims
the earliest priority for his application shall be deemed to be
the creator of such industrial design.
33. (1) Where the essential elements of an industrial Industrial design.
design, are the subject of an application for registration or
have been derived from an industrial design, for which the
right to protection belongs to another person, such other
person may apply in writing to the Director-General to assign
the said application or registration to him.
(2) The application for assignment shall be forwarded
with the prescribed fee and evidence to substantiate the claim
of the applicant. Where the registration has already been
effected, the application under subsection (1) shall be made
within one year from the date of the publication of the
registration under section 44.
(3) The Director-General shall forthwith send a copy
of such application for assignment to the applicant for
registration or the registered owner of the industrial design,
who shall within a period of three months from the date of
such notice forward to the Director-General a counter
statement in the prescribed manner together with the
prescribed fee and evidence to substantiate his claim.
(4) If the applicant or the registered owner forwards a
counter statement as referred to in subsection (3), the
Director-General shall after hearing the parties, if he
considers it necessary decide as expeditiously as possible
whether the application or registration should be assigned
and, where applicable whether the register should be
rectified. If the applicant or the registered owner fails to
forward a counter statement as provided for in subsection
(3) within the period of three months, the Director-General
shall allow the application referred to in subsection (1).
34 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(5) Where, after an application for the registration of an
industrial design has been filed, the person to whom the right
to protection belongs gives his consent to the filling of the
said application, such consent shall, for all purposes, be
deemed to have been effective from the date of filling of
such application.
Industrial design 34. (1) In the absence of any provision to the contrary
created by the in any contract of employment or for the execution of work,
employee to the ownership of an industrial design created in the
accrue to
performance of such contract or in the execution of such
employer.
work shall be deemed to accrue to the employer, or the person
who commissioned the work, as the case may be :
Provided that where the industrial design acquires an
economic value much greater than the parties could
reasonably have foreseen at the time of concluding the
contract of employment or for the execution of work, as the
case may be, the creator shall be entitled to equitable
remuneration which may be fixed by the Court on an
application made by the creator to Court in the absence of
an agreement between the parties.
(2) Where an employee whose contract of employment
does not require him to engage in any creative activity
creates, in the field of activities of his employer, an industrial
design using data or means placed at his disposal by his
employer, the ownership of such industrial design shall be
deemed to accrue to the employer in the absence of any
provision to the contrary in the contract of employment :
Provided that the employee shall be entitled to equitable
remuneration, which in the absence of agreement between
the parties, may be fixed by the Court on an application
made by the employee, taking into account his emoluments,
the economic value of the industrial design and any benefit
derived from it by the employer.
(3) The rights conferred on the creator of an industrial
design by subsections (1) and (2) shall not be restricted by
contract.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 35
35. (1) The creator of an industrial design shall be named Naming of creator
as such in the registration, unless by a declaration in writing of an industrial
design.
signed by him or any person authorized by him in writing in
that behalf and submitted to the Director-General indicates
his willingness to forgo his name being used in such
registration.
(2) The provisions of subsection (1) not be altered, varied
or modified by the terms of any contract.
CHAPTER V
REQUIREMENTSOF APPLICATIONAND PROCEDUREFOR
REGISTRATIONOFAN INDUSTRIAL DESIGN
36. (1) An application for registration of an industrial Requirements of
design shall be made to the Director-General in the prescribed application.
form and shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee and
shall contain—
(a) a request for registration of the industrial design ;
(b) the name, address and description of the applicant
and, if he is a resident outside Sri Lanka, a postal
address for service in Sri Lanka ;
(c) a specimen of the article embodying the industrial
design or copies of a photographic or graphic
representation of the industrial design, in colour
where it is in colour, or drawings and tracings of
the design ;
(d) an indication of the kind of products for which the
industrial design is to be used and, where the
regulations make provision for classification, an
indication of the class or classes in which such
products are included ;
(e) a declaration by the applicant that the industrial
design is new to the best of his knowledge.
36 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(2) The application for registration may be accompanied
by a declaration signed by the creator of the industrial design,
giving his name and address and requesting the same to be
indicated in the registration.
(3) Where the applicant is not the creator of the industrial
design the application shall be accompanied by a statement
justifying the applicant’s right to obtain registration.
(4) The Director-General shall in every case where the
applicant is not the creator of the Industrial design, shall
serve the creator with a copy of the statement referred to in
subsection (3). The creator of the industrial design shall have
the right to inspect the application and to receive, on payment
of the prescribed fee, a copy thereof.
(5) Where the application is filed through an agent, it
shall be accompanied by power of attorney granted to such
agent by the applicant.
Right of priority. 37. The applicant for registration of an industrial design
who desires to availhim self of the priority of an earlier
application filed in a convention country shall, within six
months of the date of such earlier application, append to his
application a written declaration indicating the date and
number of the earlier application, the name of the applicant
and the country in which he or his predecessor in title filed
such application and shall, within a period of three months
from the date of the later application filed in Sri Lanka,
furnish a copy of the earlier application certified as correct
by the Appropriate Authority of the country where such
earlier application was filed.
Application fee. 38. An application for registration of an industrial design
shall not be entertained unless the prescribed fee has been
paid to the Director-General.
Examination of 39. (1) The Director-General shall examine whether the
application. applicant has complied with the provisions of sections 36,
section 37 (where applicable) and section 38.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 37
(2) Where the applicant fails to comply with the
provision of sections 36 and 37 the Director-General shall
refuse registration of the industrial design :
Provided that the Director-General shall first notify the
applicant of any defect in the application and shall afford
him an opportunity to remedy such defect within three
months from the date of receipt of such notification.
(3) Where the applicant fails to comply with the
provisions of section 37 the Director-General shall not, in
connection with the registration of the industrial design, make
any reference to the priority claimed
(4) Where the applicant complies with the provisions
of section 37 the Director-General shall, in connection with
the registration of the industrial design, record the priority
claimed.
(5) Where the Director-General refuses to register an
industrial design he shall, state the grounds for such refusal
and inform the applicant, on payment of a prescribed fee of
the grounds for his decision.
40. (1) Where the applicant complies with the provisions Registration.
of sections 36 and 38 the Director-General shall examine
the industrial design in relation to the provisions of section
29.
(2) Where the industrial design is not registrable under
section 29 the Director-General shall notify the applicant
accordingly, stating the grounds for refusal of registration.
(3) Where the Director-General refuses the application
of a person for registration of an industrial design, the
applicant may within a period of one month from the date
of such notification in terms of section (2), make his
submissions in writing on the matter of such refusal to the
Director-General.
38 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(4) On receipt of any such submission as required by
subsection (3) the Director-General may grant such applicant
a hearing and inform him of the date and time of such hearing.
The Director-General may after such hearing register or
refuse to register such industrial design.
(5) (a) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections
(1) (2), (3) and (4) where the Director-General finds that the
essential elements of an industrial design is derived from an
industrial design already registered in respect of which an
application for registration is made, he shall notify the
applicant accordingly and request him, with a copy to the
registered owner of the cited industrial design, to show that
the industrial design is not so derived.
(b) The applicant may, within a period of three months
from the date of such notice, tender his written submissions
to the Director-General with the prescribed fee. The
registered owner of the cited industrial design may also tender
his observations in writing within the same period of time.
(c) On receipt of such written submissions and
observations, if any, the Director-General shall after hearing
the parties if he considers it necessary forthwith determine
whether such industrial design should be registered or not.
(d) Where the applicant fails to tender his written
submissions as required by paragraph (b) of subsection (5)
the Director-General shall refuse the application for the
registration of the industrial design for reasons to be stated
and he shall in writing, if the aplicant so requests, inform
the applicant in writing of the grounds for his decision on
payment by the applicant of the prescrided fee.
(6) Where the Director-General is of the opinion that
the industrial design is registrable he may request the
applicant to pay within a period of one month the prescribed
fee for publication of the application.
(7) Where the fee for publication of the application is
not paid within the prescribed period registration of the
industrial design shall be refused.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 39
(8) (a) If the fee for publication is paid within the
prescribed period the Director-General shall proceed to
publish the application setting out the date of application,
number of the application, the name and address of the
applicant and if the applicant is resident outside Sri Lanka,
a postal address for service in Sri Lanka, the priority claimed,
a description of the industrial design and the kind and class
of the industrial design.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (6),
(7) and paragraph (a) of subsection (8), the Director-General
may in his discretion by a written notice, require the applicant
to publish the application in accordance with the provisions
of paragraph (a) of subsection (8) and in the form as indicated
by the Director-General. Where the applicant fails or neglects
to publish the application as required by the Director-General
within a period of two months from the said notice of the
Director-General, the application may be refused.
(9) Where any person considers that the industrial design
is not registrable on one or more grounds referred to in section
29 he may within a period of two months from the date of
publication give to the Director-General in a prescribed form
and together with the prescribed fee, notice of opposition to
such registration stating his grounds of opposition
accompanied by evidence to substantiate such grounds.
(10) Where notice of opposition has not been received
by the Director-General within the period specified in
subsection (9) the Director-General shall register the
industrial design.
(11) Where, within the period specified in subsection
(9) notice of opposition in the prescribed form is received
by the Director-General, together with the prescribed fee,
he shall serve a copy of such grounds of opposition on the
applicant and shall request him to present his observations
on those grounds in writing accompanied by evidence to
support his application within a period of one month.
40 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(12) On receipt of the observations of the applicant the
Director-General shall after hearing the parties, where taking
all the circumstances into consideration he considers such
hearing necessary, decide, as expeditiously as possible,
whether or not the industrial design may be registered. If he
decides that the industrial design is registrable he shall
accordingly register such industrial design—
(a) where no appeal is preferred against his decision,
upon the expiry of the period within which an appeal
may be preferred against his decision ;
(b) where an appeal is preferred against his decision,
upon the dismissal of such appeal, as the case may
be.
(13) The Director-General may allow a reasonable
extension of the prescribed period within which any act has
to be done or any fee has to be paid under this section.
Issue of certificate 41. Upon the registration of an industrial design, the
of registration. Director-General shall issue to the registered owner thereof
a Certificate of Registration and shall, at the request of the
registered owner, send such certificate to him by registered
post to his last recorded postal address in Sri Lanka or, if he
is resident outside Sri Lanka, to his last recorded postal
address.
Register of 42. (1) The Director-General shall keep and maintain
Industrial a register called the “Register of Industrial Designs” wherein
Designs. shall be recorded, in the order of their registration, all
registered industrial designs and such other particulars
relating to the industrial designs as are authorised or directed
by this Part to be so recorded or may from time to time be
prescribed
(2) The registration of an industrial design shall include
a representation of the industrial design and shall specify its
number, the name and address of the registered owner and,
if the registered owner is resident outside Sri Lanka, a postal
address for service in Sri Lanka ; the date of application and
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 41
registration ; if priority is validly claimed, an indication of
that fact and the number, date and country of the application
on the basis of which the priority is claimed ; the kinds and
classes of products referred to in paragraph (d) subsection
(1) of section 36 and the name and address of the creator of
the industrial design, if he has requested his name to be
indicated as such in the registration.
43. Any person may examine the register and may obtain Examination of
certified extracts therefrom on payment of the prescribedfee. register and
certified copies.
44. The Director-General shall cause to be published Publication of
in the Gazette, in the prescribed form, all registered industrial registered
industrial designs.
designs in the order of their registration, including in respect
of each industrial design so published reference to such
particulars as may be prescribed.
CHAPTE R VI
DURATIONOF REGISTRATIONOFAN INDUSTRIAL DESIGN
45. Subject to, and without prejudice to the other
Duration of
provisions of this Part, registration of an industrial design registration.
shall expire on the completion of five years from the date of
receipt of the application for registration.
46. (1) Registration of an industrial design may be Renewal.
renewed for two consecutive periods of five years each, on
an application made in that behalf and on payment of the
prescribed fee.
(2) The renewal fee shall be paid within the six months
preceding the date of expiration of the period of registration:
Provided, however, that a period of grace of six months
shall be allowed for the payment of the fee after the date of
such expiration, upon payment of such surcharge as may be
prescribed.
(3) The Director-General shall record in the register and
cause to be published in the Gazette in the prescribed form
a list of all renewals of registration of industrial designs.
42 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(4) Where the renewal fee has not been paid within such
period or such extended period as is specified in subsection
(2), the Director-General shall remove from the relevant
register the registration relating to such industrial design.
CHAPTER VII
RIGHTSOFA REGISTERED OWNEROFAN INDUSTRIAL DESIGN
Rights of a 47. (1) Subject and without prejudice to other
registered owner provisions of this Part, the registered owner of an industrial
of an industrial
design shall in relation to such industrial design have the
design.
exclusive rights to —
(a) reproduce and embody such industrial design in
making a product ;
(b) import, offer for sale, sell or use a product
embodying such industrial design ;
(c) stock for the purpose of offering for sale, selling or
using, a product embodying such industrial design;
(d) assign or transmit the registration of the industrial
design ;
(e) conclude licence contracts.
(2) No person shall do any of the acts referred to in
subsection (1) without the consent of the registered owner
of the industrial design.
(3) The acts referred to in subsection (1), if done by
any unauthorized person, shall not be lawful solely by reason
of the fact that the reproduction of the registered industrial
design differs from the registered industrial design in minor
respects or that the reproduction of the registered industrial
design is embodied in a type of product different from a
product embodying the registered industrial design.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 43
48. The provisions of subsection (1) of section 47 shall— Limitation of
registered owner’s
(1) extend only to acts done for industrial or rights.
commercial purposes ;
(2) not preclude third parties from performing any of
the acts referred to therein in respect of a product
embodying the registered industrial design after the
said product has been lawfully manufactured,
imported, offered for sale, sold, used or stocked in
Sri Lanka.
CHAPTER VIII
ASSIGNMENTAND TRANSMISSIONOF APPLICATIONS FOR
REGISTRATIONOFINDUSTRIALDESIGNSAND REGISTRATIONS
OFTHESAME
49. (1) An application for registration or the registration Assignment and
of an industrial design may be assigned or transmitted and transmission of
applications and
such assignment or transmission shall be in writing signed
registrations.
by or on behalf of the contracting parties.
(2) Any person becoming entitled by assignment or by
transmission to an application for registration or the
registration of an industrial design may apply to the Director-
General in the prescribed manner along within the prescribed
fee to have such assignment or transmission recorded in the
register.
(3) No such assignment or transmission shall be
recorded in the register unless the prescribed fee has been
paid to the Director-General.
(4) No such assignment or transmission shall have effect
against third parties unless so recorded in the register.
50. In the absence of any agreement to the contrary Joint ownership of
between the parties, joint owners of an application for applications and
registration.
registration or the registration of an industrial design may,
separately, assign or transmit their rights in the application
44 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
or registration, use the industrial design and exercise the
exclusive rights referred to in paragraphs (a) to (c) of
subsection (1) of section 47, but may only jointly withdraw
the application, renounce the registration or conclude a
licence contract.
CHAPTER IX
LICENCE CONTRACTSOFINDUSTRIALDESIGNS
Interpretation. 51. For the purposes of this Part licence contract means
any contract by which the registered owner of an industrial
design (“the Licensor”) grants to another person or enterprise
(“the licensee”) a licence to do any or all of the acts referred
to in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of subsection (1) of
section47.
Form and record 52. (1) A licence contract shall be in writing signed by
of licence or on behalf of the contracting parties.
contract.
(2) Upon a request in writing signed by or on behalf of
the contracting parties, the Director-General shall on
payment of the prescribed fee, record in the register such
particulars relating to the contract as the parties thereto
requires to be recorded :
Provided that the parties shall not be required to disclose
or have recorded any other particulars relating to the said
contract.
Rights of licensee. 53. In the absence of any provision to the contrary in
the licence contract, the licensee shall—
(a) be entitled to do any or all of the acts referred to in
paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of subsection (1) of
section 47 within Sri Lanka, during the period of
validity of the registration of the industrial design,
inclusive of the period of renewl if any ;
(b) not be entitled to assign or transmit his rights under
the licence contract or grant sub-licenses to third
parties.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 45
54. (1) In the absence of any provision to the contrary Rights of licensor.
in the licence contract, the licensor may grant further licenses
to third parties in respect of the same industrial design or on
behalf of himself do any or all of the acts referred to in sub-
paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of subsection (1) of section 47.
(2) Where the license contract provides that the license
is exclusive, and unless it is expressly provided otherwise in
such contract, the licensor shall not grant further licenses to
third parties in respect of the same industrial design or not
execute any of the acts referred to in sub-paragraphs (a), (b)
and (c) of subsection (1) of section 47 or cause to be executed.
55. Any clause or condition in a license contract shall Invalid clauses in
be null and void in so far as it imposes upon the licensee, in license contracts.
industrial or commercial field, restrictions not derived from
the rights conferred by this Part on the registered owner of
an industrial design, or unnecessary for safeguarding of such
rights :
Provided that—
(a) restrictions concerning the scope, extent, or duration
of use of the industrial design, or the geographical
area in or the quality or quantity of the products in
connection with which the industrial design may
be used; and
(b) obligations imposed upon the licensee to refrain
from all acts capable of prejudicing the validity of
the registration of the industrial design,
shall not be deemed to constitute such restrictions.
56. Where, before the expiration of the license contract Effect of nullity of
the registration is declared null and void the licensee in such registration of
license contract.
event not be required to make any payment to the licensor
under the licence contract, and shall be entitled to
reimbursement of the payments already made :
46 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
Provided that the licensor shall not be required to make
any repayment, or be required to make repayment in part, to
the extent of his ability to prove that such repayment would
be inequitable having considerd all the circumstances and
in particular whether the licensee has effectively profited
from the licence.
Expiry, 57. The Director-General shall—
termination or
invalidation of (1) if he is satisfied that a recorded licence contract
licence has expired or been terminated, record that fact in
contract.
the register upon a request in writing to that effect
signed by or on behalf of the parties thereto ;
(2) record in the register the expiry, termination or
invalidation of a licence contract under any
provision of this Part.
Licence 58. (1) Where the Director-General has reasonable
contracts cause to believe that any licence contract or any amendment
involving
or renewal thereof—
payments
abroad.
(a) which involves the payment of royalties abroad ;or
(b) which by reason of other circumstances relating to
such licence contract,
is detrimental to the economic development of Sri Lanka he
shall in writing communicate such fact to the Governor of
the Central Bank and transmit all papers in his custody
relevant to the matter which are essential to the making of a
decision on such matter to the Governor of the Central Bank.
(2) Where the Governor of the Central Bank on receipt
of any communication under subsection (1) informs the
Director-General in writing that the said licence contract or
any amendment or renewal thereof is detrimental to the
economic development of Sri Lanka, the Director-General
shall cancel and invalidate the record of such contract in the
register.
(3) The provisions of this section shall apply, mutatis
mutandis, to assignment and transmissions.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 47
(4) The provisions of this Chapter shall apply mutatis
mutandis, to sub-licences.
CHAPTER X
RENUNCIATIONAND NULLITYOF REGISTRATIONOFINDUSTRIAL
DESIGN
59. (1) The registered owner of an industrial design may Renunciation of
renounce the registration by a declaration in writing signed registration.
by him or on his behalf in writing and submit it to the
Director-General.
(2) The Director-General shall, on receipt of the said
declaration, record it in the register and cause such record
to be published in the Gazette.
(3) The renunciation shall take effect from the date that
the Director-General receives the said declaration.
(4) Where a licence contract in respect of an industrial
design is recorded in the register the Director-General shall
not, in the absence of any provision to the contrary in such
licence contract, accept or record the said renunciation except
upon receipt of a signed declaration by which every licensee
or sub-licensee on record consents to the said renunciation,
unless the requirement of their consent is expressly waived
in the licence contract.
60. (1) The Court may on the application, to which the Nullity of
registered owner of the industrial design and every assignee, registration.
licensee or sub-licensee on record shall be made a party, of
any person having a legitimate interest, or of any competent
authority including the Director-General, declare the
registration of the industrial design null and void on any one
or more of the following grounds—
(a) that the provisions of sections 29, 30 and 31 have
not been complied with :
48 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
Provided, however, that the grounds of nullity
referred to in subsection (2) of section 29 shall not
be taken into account if such grounds are not
apparent on the date of the making of the application
to Court;
(b) that the identical industrial design has been
previously registered upon a prior application or
has been conferred earlier priority by virtue of an
application in that behalf upon the ground of prior
registration in another country ;
(c) that the essential elements of the registered
industrial design have been unlawfully derived from
the creation of another person within the meaning
of section 33.
(2) Where an application under subsection (1) of this
section relates to several industrial designs, included in the
registration and any ground for nullity applies to some, the
Court shall declare such registration null and void in so far
as it relates to the industrial design in respect of which the
ground for nullity applies.
Date and effect of 61. (1) Upon a final decision of the Court declaring
nullity. total or partial nullity of the registration of an industrial
design, the registration shall be deemed to have been null
and void totally or partially, as the case may be, from the
date of such registration.
(2) When a declaration of nullity becomes final the
Registrar of the Court shall notify the Director-General who
shall record such declaration in the register and cause it be
published in the Gazette.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 49
PART IV
CHAPTER XI
DEFINITIONS
62. (1) For the purposes of this Part, “invention” means Definition of
an idea of an inventor which permits in practice the solution invention.
to a specific problem in the field of technology.
(2) An invention may be, or may relate to, a product or
process.
(3) The following, notwithstanding they are inventions
within the meaning of subsection (1), shall not be
patentable—
(a) discoveries, scientific theories and mathematical
methods ;
(b) plants, animals and other micro organism other than
transgenic micro organism and an essentially
biological process for the production of plants and
animals other than non-biological and
microbiological processes:
Provided however, that a patent granted in
respect of micro-organisms shall be subject to the
provisions of this Act;
(c) schemes, rules, or methods for doing business,
performing purely mental acts or playing games ;
(d) methods for the treatment of the human or animal
body by surgery or therapy, and diagnostic methods
practiced on the human or animal body :
Provided however, any product used in any such
method shall be patentable;
(e) an invention which is useful in the utilization of
special nuclear material or atomic energy in an
atomic weapon;
50 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(f) any invention, the prevention within Sri Lanka of
the commercial exploitation of which is necessary
to protect the public order, morality including the
protection of human, animal or plant life or health
or the avoidance of serious prejudice to the
environment.
Patentable 63. An invention is patentable if it is new, involves an
inventions. inventive step and is industrially applicable.
Novelty. 64. (1) An invention is new if it is not anticipated by
prior art.
(2) Prior art shall consist of—
(a) everything disclosed to the public, anywhere in the
world, by written publication, oral disclosure, use
or in any other way, prior to the filing or, where
appropriate, priority date of the patent application
claiming the invention ;
(b) the contents of patent application made in Sri Lanka
having an earlier filing or, where appropriate,
priority date than the patent application referred to
in paragraph (a), to extent that such contents are
included in the patent granted on the basis of the
said patent application made in Sri Lanka.
(3) A disclosure made under paragraph (a) of subsection
(2) shall be disregarded—
(a) if such disclosure occurred within one year
preceding the date of the patent application and if
such disclosure or in consequence of acts committed
by the applicant or his predecessor in title ;
(b) if such disclosure occurred within six months
preceding the date of the patent application and if
such disclosure was by reason or in consequence
of any abuse of the rights of the applicant or his
predecessor in title.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 51
65. An invention shall be considered as involving an Inventive step.
inventive step if, having regard to the prior art relevant to
the patent application claiming the invention, such inventive
step would not have been obvious to a person having ordinary
skill in the art.
66. An invention shall be considered industrially Industrial
applicable if it can be made or used in any kind of industry. application of
invention.
CHAPTER XII
RIGHTTOA PATENT
67. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 68 the right Right to a
to a patent shall belong to the inventor. patient.
(2) Where two or more persons have jointly made an
invention, the right to a patent shall belong to them jointly.
(3) If and to the extent to which two or more persons
have made the same invention independently of each other,
the person whose application has the earliest filling date or,
if priority is claimed, the earliest validly claimed priority
date, shall have the right to the patent, so long as that
application is not withdrawn, abandoned or rejected.
68. Where the essential element of the invention claimed Assignment of
in a patent application or patent have been unlawfully derived patent application
or patent, by court
from an invention for which the right to the patent belongs
in case of
to another person, such other person may apply to the Court
usurpation.
for an order that the said patent application or patent be
assigned to him :
Provided that where, after a patent application has been
filed, the person to whom the right to the patent belongs
gives his consent to the filing of the said patent application,
such consent shall, for all purposes, be deemed to have been
effective from the date of filing of such application :
Provided also that the Court shall not entertain an
application for the assignment of a patent after the expiry of
a period of five years from the date of grant of the patent.
52 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
Inventions made 69. (1) In the absence of any provision to the contrary
by an employee in any contract of employment or for the execution of work,
or pursuant to a the right to a patent for an invention made in the performance
commission.
of such contract of employment or in the execution of such
work shall be deemed to accrue to the employer, or the person
who commissioned the work, as the case may be :
Provided that where the invention acquires an economic
value much greater than the parties could reasonably have
foreseen at the time of entering the contract of employment
or for the execution of work, as the case may be, the inventor
shall be entitled to equitable remuneration which may be
fixed by the Court an application made to it in that behalf,
in the absence of an agreement between the parties.
(2) Where an employee whose contract of employment
does not require him to engage in any inventive activity,
makes in the field of activities of his employer, an invention
using data or means placed at his disposal by his employer,
the right to the patent for such invention shall be deemed to
accrue to the employer, in the absence of any provision to
the contrary in the contract of employment :
Provided that the employee shall be entitled to equitable
remuneration which, in the absence of agreement between
the parties, may be fixed by the Court, taking into account
his emoluments an application made to it in that behalf the
economic value of the invention and any benefit derived
from it by the employer.
(3) The rights conferred on the inventor under
subsections (1) and (2) shall not be restricted by contract.
Naming of 70. (1) The inventor shall be named as such in the
inventor. patent, unless by a declaration in writing signed by him or
on his behalf and submitted to the Director-General, he
indicates his decision to forgo his name being included in
the patent.
(2) The provisions of subsection (1) shall not be
modified by the terms of any contract.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 53
CHAPTER XIII
REQUIREMENTSOF APPLICATIONAND PROCEDURE
FOR GRANTOFA PATENT
71. (1) (a) An application for the grant of a patent shall Requirements of
be made to the Director-General in the prescribed form and applications
shall contain—
(i) a request for the grant of the patent ;
(ii) a description of the patent;
(iii) a claim or claims ;
(iv) a drawing or drawings, where required ;
(v) an abstract ;
(vi) date and number of any application for a patent
filed by the applicant abroad (hereinafter referred
to as the “foreign application”), if any, relating to
the same, or essentially the same invention as that
claimed in the present application ;
(vii) a declaration that the applicant or his predecessor
in title has not obtained a patent abroad before the
application was filed relating to the same or
essentially the same invention as that claimed in
the application.
(b) If the declaration referred to in sub-paragraph (vii)
of paragraph (a) of subsection (1) of this section is found to
be false, the Court may declare the patent to be null and
void on an application made to it by any interested party or
a Competent Authority including the Director-General. The
registered owner of the patent, assignees and licensees shall
be made party to that application.
54 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(c) Where the applicant’s ordinary residence or principal
place of business is outside Sri Lanka, he shall be represented
by an agent resident in Sri Lanka whose name and address
shall be given in the application, and the application shall
be accompanied by a power of attorney granted to such agent
by the applicant.
(d) The application may be accompanied by a
declaration signed by the inventor, giving his name and
address and requesting that he be named as such in the patent.
(2) (a) The request shall contain –
(i) a petition that the patent be granted ;
(ii) the title of the invention;
(iii) the name, address, description and any other
prescribed information concerning the applicant,
the inventor and the agent, if any.
(b) Where the applicant is not the inventor, the request
shall be accompanied by a statement justifying the applicant’s
right to the patent.
(c) The Director-General shall send a copy of the
statement referred to in paragraph (b) to the inventor who
shall have the right to inspect the application and to receive,
on payment of the prescribed fee, a copy thereof.
(3) The description shall disclose the invention in a
manner sufficiently clear and complete for the invention to
be evaluated, and to be carried out by a person having
ordinary skill in the relevant technology and shall, in
particular, indicate the best mode known to the applicant
for carrying out the invention.
(4) The claim or claims shall be clear, concise and
supported by the description.
(5) Drawings shall be required when they are necessary
for the understanding of the invention.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 55
(6) The terms of any claim shall determine the scope
and extent of the protection afforded by the patent, and the
description and drawings may be used to interpret such claim.
(7) The abstract shall serve the purpose of technical
information and shall not be used for the purpose of
determining or interpreting the scope and extent of the
protection afforded by the patent.
(8) Any application filed outside Sri Lanka under the
Patent Corporation Treaty for a patent designating Sri Lanka
shall if the applicant files a corresponding application with
the Director-General be deemed to be an application made
under this Act.
For the purposes of this Chapter “the Patent Corporation
Treaty” means the Patent Corporation Treaty made in
Washington on June19th 1970, as amended from time
totime.
72. An application for the grant of a patent shall not be Application fee.
entertained unless prescribed fee has been paid to the
Director-General.
73. (1) Every applicant shall furnish, within the Search report.
prescribed period, a report, which if not in English shall be
accompanied by a translation thereof in English, of a search
which shall conform such type as may be prescribed :
Provided, however, that in lieu of the said search an
applicant may request the Director-General to refer the
application to a local examiner who shall examine the
application on the basis of any claim with due regard to the
description and the drawings, if any, and furnish a report to
the Director-General within the prescribed period, on the
relevant prior art, after making the required effort to discover
as much of the relevant prior art as facilities permit ; and for
the purposes of the search the local examiner shall make
reference to every documentation on prior art available to
him.
56 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(2) The applicant shall, when requiring the Director-
General to refer his application to a local examiner, forward
such application with the prescribed fee to Director-General.
(3) (a) The applicant shall, at the request of the Director-
General, furnish him with the following documents in respect
of any foreign application for a patent filed by him abroad
relating to the same or essentially the same invention as that
claimed in the application filed under this Act –
(i) a copy of any communication received by the
applicant concerning the results of any search or
examination carried out in respect of the foreign
application ;
(ii) a copy of the patent granted on the basis of the
foreign application ; and
(iii) a copy of any final decision rejecting the foreign
application or refusing the grant of a patent
requested in the foreign application.
(b) The applicant shall, at the request of the Director–
General, furnish him with a copy of any final decision
invalidating the patent granted on the basis of the foreign
application referred to in paragraph (a).
(4) For this purposes of the section “local examiner”
means any skilled person to whom the Director-General may
refer questions concerning patents.
Unity of 74. An application shall relate to one invention only or
invention. to a group of inventions which are so linked to each other so
as to form a single general inventive concept.
Amendment 75. (1) An applicant may amend the application,
and division provided that the amendment shall not exceed the limits of
of application. the disclosure in the initial application.
(2) (a) An applicant may divide the application into
two or more applications (hereinafter referred to as
“divisional applications”) provided that each divisional
application shall not exceed the limits of disclosure in the
initial application.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 57
(b) Each divisional application shall be entitled to the
filing, or where applicable, priority, from date of the initial
application.
(3) An amendment to an application or a division of an
application shall be subject to the payment of a prescribed
fee.
76. (1) An application may contain a declaration
Right of priority.
claiming the priority, pursuant to the Convention, of one or
more earlier national, regional or international applications
filed by the applicant or his predecessor in title in or for any
State party to the said Convention.
(2) Where the application contains a declaration under
subsection (1), the Director-General may require the
applicant to furnish, within the prescribed period, a copy of
the earlier application, certified as correct by an officer
authorized in that behalf, for that purpose by the Office with
which it was filed or, where the earlier application is an
international application filed under the Patent Co-operation
Treaty, by an office authorized in that behalf for that purpose
by the International Bureau of the World Intellectual Property
Organization.
(3) The effect of the declaration referred to in subsection
(1) shall be the same as provided for in the Convention
referred to therein.
(4) Where any of the requirements of this section or
any regulation made thereunder have not been complied
with, the declaration referred to in subsection (1) shall be
deemed to be null and void.
77. (1) The Director-General shall record as the filing
Filing date.
date, the date of receipt of the application :
Provided that on the date of the receipt of the application
, contains –
(a) the name and address of the applicant ;
58 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(b) the name and address of the inventor and, where the
applicant is not his inventor, the statement referred
to in paragraph (b) of subsection (2) of section 71 ;
(c) a description of the patent;
(d) a claim or claims :
Provided further that at the time of receipt of the
application the prescribed fee has been paid.
(2) Where the Director-General finds, at the time of
receipt of the application, that the provisions of subsection
(1) have not been complied with, he shall request the
applicant to file the required correction within a period of
three months from the date of such request.
(3) Where the applicant complies with the request
referred to in subsection (2), the Director-General shall record
as the filing date, the date of receipt of the required correction
; where the applicant fails to so comply the Director–General
shall treat the application as null and void.
(4) Where the application refers to drawings which in
fact are not included in the application, the Director-General
shall request the applicant to furnish the missing drawings.
(5) Where the applicant complies with the request
referred to in subsection (4), the Director-General shall record
as the filing date the date of receipt of the missing drawings;
where the applicant fails to so comply the Director-General
shall record as the filing date, the date of receipt of the
application and shall make no reference to the said drawings.
(6) The title, description, drawings, abstracts and claims
filed with any international application made under
subsection (8) of section 71, designating Sri Lanka shall be
deemed to be carried out in accodance with specifications
required under this Act.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 59
(7) The filing date of such application made under
subsection (8) of section 71 and processed by the office shall
be deemed to be the date of filling of such application under
the Patent Corporation Treaty.
78. (1) The Director-General shall examine the
Examination of
application and shall satisfy himself as to the fulfilment of applications &c.
the following:—
(a) where applicable, the requirements of paragraph (b)
of subsection (1) of section 71 ;
(b) the requirements of paragraph (a) of subsection (2)
of section 71 ;
(c) where applicable, the requirements of paragraph (b)
of subsection (2) of section 71 ;
(d) the description, the claims and where applicable,
the drawings, which comply with the prescribed
requirements ;
(e) the essential elements of the invention claimed in
the application have not been unlawfully derived
from a patent already granted in Sri Lanka ;
(f) the application contains an abstract ;
(g) the search report referred to in section 73 has been
submitted.
(2) Where the Director-General finds that the conditions
referred to in subsection (1) are not fulfiled he shall request
the applicant to file the required correction within a period
of three months from the date of such request ; where the
applicant fails to so comply the application shall, subject to
the provisions of subsection (3), be rejected.
(3) Where no correction is provided in response to a
request under subsection (2), the Director-General shall, on
payment of the prescribed fee within the prescribed period,
include the corrections into the application and if the
prescribed fee is not paid within the prescribed period the
application shall be rejected.
60 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(4) Where the Director-General finds that the essential
elements of an invention claimed in an application are
unlawfully derived from a patent already granted in Sri
Lanka, such application shall be rejected.
(5) The Director-General shall notify the applicant of
any decision under subsections (2), (3) and (4) and any
decision taken to reject the application shall be in writing
stating the reasons for such rejection.
Grant of patent. 79. (1) The grant of a patent shall not be refused and a
patent shall not be invalidated on the ground that the
commercial exploitation of the claimed invention is prohibited
by any law except where the prevention of the commercial
exploitation of the claimed invention is necessary in order to
protect public order, and morality including the protection of
human, animal or plant life or health or for the avoidance of
serious prejudice to the environment.
(2) Where the applicant fulfils the requirements of
subsection (1) of section 78 to the satisfaction of the Director-
General, he shall grant the patent, and shall forthwith —
(a) record the particulars relating to patent in the
Registerof patents required to be maintained in
accordance with the provisions of section 80 ;
(b) issue a certificate to the applicant in respect of the
grant of a patent together with a copy of the patent
documents including the search report :
Provided however where the applicant has not tendered
an international search report, but has requested the Director–
General to refer the application to a local examiner under
the proviso to section 73, the Director-General shall publish
a notice informing the public, of the possibility of granting
a patent to the applicant at the expiration of a period of three
months from the date of publication of the notice, unless
otherwise directed by the Court.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 61
(3) The Director-General shall thereafter as soon as
practicable cause to be published in the Gazette a notice
pertaining to the grant of the patent.
(4) The patent shall be deemed to be granted on the date
that the Director-General acts in accordance with the
provisions of paragraph (a) of subsection (2).
(5) The notice referred to in the proviso to subsection(2)
shall contain the name and address of the applicant and where
the applicant is resident outside Sri Lanka a postal address
for service in Sri Lanka, a description of the invention and
any other information as may be prescribed.
(6) The applicant shall make the payment of the
prescribed fee for the publication referred to in the proviso
to subsection (2) upon the request of the Director-General,
and where the applicant fails to satisfy such request within
one month from the date of such request the Director-General
shall refuse to grant such patent.
80. The Director-General shall keep and maintain a Register of
register (hereinafter called and referred to as the “Register Patents.
of Patents”) wherein all patents shall be recorded, in the
order of their grant, specifying the number of the patent,
the name and address of the grantee and, if the grantee is
resident outside Sri Lanka, a postal address for service in
Sri Lanka, the date of application and grant, any change in
the ownership of a patent application or patent, the
amendment or division of a patent application, the
assignment or transmission of a patent application or patent,
any valid claim to priority, the surrender or revocation of a
patent and such other matters relating to patents as are
authorised or directed by this Part to be so recorded or
may from time to time be prescribed.
81. Any person may examine the register and may obtain Examination of
certified extracts therefrom on payment of the prescribed fee. register and
certified copies.
62 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
Inspection of 82. (1) Any person may, after the grant of a patent,
files. inspect, subject to subsections (2) and (3), the file relating
to any patent and may obtain certified extracts therefrom on
payment of the prescribed fee.
(2) The file relating to a patent application may be
inspected before the grant of the patent only with the written
permission of the applicant :
Provided that before the grant of the patent the Director-
General may divulge the following information to any
person—
(a) the name, address and description of the applicant
and the name and address of the agent, if any ;
(b) the number of the application ;
(c) the filing date of the application and, if priority is
claimed, the priority date, the number of the earlier
application and the name of the State in which the
earlier application was filed or, when the earlier
application is a regional or an international
application, the name of the State or States for which
and the office with which, it was filed ;
(d) the title of the invention ;
(e) any change in the ownership of the application and
any reference to a licence contract appearing in the
file relating to the application.
(3) Where the provisions of the proviso to subsection
(2) of section 79 are applicable, the reference to the grant of
a patent in subsections (1) and (2) of this section shall be
deemed to be a reference to the publication of the notice
referred to in the said proviso.
(4) No person employed in or at the Office may make a
patent application or be granted a patent or acquire or hold
in any manner whatsoever any right relating to a patent during
the period of his employment in or at the office and for one
year after the termination of such employment.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 63
CHAPTER XIV
DURATIONOF PATENT
83. (1) Subject and without prejudice to the other Duration of patent.
provisions of this Part a patent shall expire twenty years
after the filing date of application for its registration.
(2) Where a patentee intends at the expiration of the
second year from the date of grant of the patent to keep the
same in force he shall, twelve months prior to the date of
expiration of the second and each succeeding year during
the term of the patent, pay the prescribed annual fee:
Provided, however, that a period of grace of six months
shall be allowed after the date of such expiration, upon
payment of such surcharge as may be prescribed :
Provided further that the patentee may pay in advance
the whole or any portion of the aggregate of the prescribed
annual fees.
CHAPTER XV
RIGHTSOF OWNEROF PATENT
84. (1) Subject and without prejudice to the other Rights of owner of
provisions of this Part, the owner of a patent shall have the patent.
following exclusive rights in relation to a patented
invention:—
(a) to exploit the patented invention ;
(b) to assign or transmit the patent ;
(c) to conclude licence contracts.
(2) No person shall do any of the acts referred to in
subsection (1) without the consent of the owner of the patent.
64 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(3) For the purposes of the this Part “exploitation” of a
patented invention means any of the following acts in relation
to a patent :—
(a) when the patent has been granted in respect of a
product—
(i) making, importing, offering for sale, selling,
exporting or using the product ;
(ii) stocking such product for the purpose of
offering for sale, selling, exporting or using ;
(b) when the patent has been granted in respect of a
process—
(i) using of the process ;
(ii) doing any of the acts referred to in paragraph
(a), in respect of a product obtained directly
by means of the process ;
(iii) preventing any person using that process or
using, selling or importing any product
obtained directly by means of that process
unless such person is authorized to do so.
Burden of proof 85. (1) Where the subject mater of a patent is a process
to be on the for obtaining a product, the burden of proof in a civil action
alleged infringer.
of establishing that an alleged infringing product was not
obtained by that patented process shall be on the alleged
infringer—
(a) if the product obtained by the patented process is
new ; or
(b) if a substantial likelihood exists that the product
was made by the patented process and the patent
owner has been unable through reasonable efforts
to determine the process actually used.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 65
(2) In the gathering and evaluation of evidence, the
legitimate interests of the alleged infringer in protecting his
undisclosed information shall be taken into account.
86. (1) The provisions of section 84 shall— Limitation of
owner’s rights.
(i) extend only to acts done for industrial or
commercial purposes and in particular shall not
extend to acts done only for the purpose of scientific
research;
(ii) not preclude a person having the rights referred to
in section 87 or a licensee, from exploiting the
patented invention ;
(iii) not extend to the presence or use of products on
foreign vessels, aircraft, spacecraft, or land vehicles
which temporarily or accidentally enter the waters,
airspace or territory of Sri Lanka ;
(iv) not extend to acts in respect of articles which have
been put in the market by the owner of the patent
or by a manufacturer under licence.
(2) (a) Any person, body of persons, a government
department or a statutory body may make an application to
the Director General for the purpose of obtaining a licence
to exploit a patent in the manner hereafter provided.
(b) Upon the receipt of such application, the Director
General may issue a licnece for exploition if he is satisfied
that the applicant has made efforts to obtain approval from
the right holder on reasonable commercial terms and
conditions and that such efforts have not been successful
within a reasonable period of time.
(c) Director-General may waive the requirements set
out in paragraph (b) where he has statisfied himself of the
existence of a national emergency or any other circumstances
of extreme urgency or in case of public non-commercial use
66 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
for the purposes such as national security, nutrition, health
or for the development of others vital section of the national
economy.
(d) The exploitation of the patent shall be limited in
scope and duration to the purpose as is specified in the
licence. Such exploitation shall be predominantly for the
purpose of supply to the domestic market.
(e) The Director-General shall consider each
application on its individual merits before granting a licence
to exploit a patent.
(f) The issuance of a licence shall be non-exclusive and
subject to the payment of adequate remuneration to the owner
of the patent taking into consideration the economic value
as determined by the Director-General, and where applicable,
the need to correct anti-competitive practices.
(g) Where such application is for the exploitation of
the patent (the second patent) which cannot be exploited
without infringing another patent (the first patent), the
following conditions shall apply :
(i) the invention claimed in the second patent shall
involve and important technical advance of
considerable economic significance in relation to
the invention claimed in the first patent;
(ii) the owner of the first patent shall be entitled to a
cross licence on reasonable terms to exploit the
invention claimed in the second patent; and
(iii) the exploitation authorized in respect of the first
patent shall be non-assignable except with the
assignment of the second patent.
(h) The decision of the Director-General, shall be
notified in writing to the owner of the patent as soon as
practicable.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 67
(i) The Director-General, shall upon, the request of the
owner or of the beneficiary of the licence, after hearing the
parties, vary his decision by amending the terms subject to
which licence for the exploitation of the patent is issued to
the extent only that the changed circumstances justify such
variation.
(j) The Director-General shall upon the request of the
owner, terminate the non-voluntary license if he is satisfied
that the circumstances which led to his decision have ceased
to exist and are unlikely to recur or that the license has failed
to comply with terms of such licence.
(k) Notwithstanding anything contained in paragraph,
(j) the Director-General shall not terminate a licence, if he
is satisfied that adequate protection of the legitimate interest
of the beneficiary of the licence justifies the continuity of
such licence.
(l) The licence to exploit a patent may be transferred
only with the enterprise or the business of the licencee of
such patent or with the part of such enterprise or business,
in relation to which the licence to exploit has been granted.
(m) Where a judicial or administrative body has
determined that the manner of exploitation of a patent by its
owner or its licensee is anti-competitive, and the Director-
General is satisfied that the exploitation of a patent in
accordance with this section would remedy such practice,
the Director-General may authorize any person, body of
persons, government departments or statutory body to exploit
the patent without a licence of the owner of the patent. The
provisions of the above paragraphs except those of paragraphs
(b), (c) and (g) shall be applicable to such licence.
(3) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the
Director-General under subsection (2), may tender an appeal
therefrom. The provisions of section 173 shal1, mutatis
mutandis, apply in respect of such appeal.
68 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
Rights derived 87. (1) Where a person at the filing date or, where
from prior applicable, the priority date, of the patent application—
manufacture or
use.
(a) was in good faith making the product or using the
process in Sri Lanka which is the subject of the
invention claimed in such application ;
(b) had in good faith made serious preparations in Sri
Lanka towards the making of the product or using
the process referred to in paragraph (a),
he shall have the right, despite the grant of the patent, to
exploit the patented invention :
Provided that the product in question is made, or the
process in question is used by the said person in Sri Lanka :
Provided further, if the invention was disclosed under
circumstances referred to in paragraph (a) or (b) of subsection
(3) of section 64, he may prove, that his knowledge of the
invention was not as a result of such disclosure.
(2) The right referred to in subsection (1) shall not be
assigned or transmitted except as part of the business of the
person concerned.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not affect the
rights of any person to object to the grant of a patent on the
ground that such invention is not patendable under sections
63, 64, 65 and 66 of the Act, or to seek relief under sections
68 and 99 of the Act.
CHAPTER XVI
ASSIGNMENTAND TRANSMISSIONOF PATENT APPLICATIONSAND
PATENTS
Assignment and 88. (1) A patent application or patent may be assigned
transmission of or transmitted and such assignment or transmission shall be
patent applications
in writing signed by or on behalf of the contracting parties.
and patents.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 69
(2) Any person becoming entitled by assignment or
transmission to a patent application or patent may apply to
the Director-General in the prescribed manner to have such
assignment or transmission recorded in the register.
(3) No such assignment or transmission shall be
recorded in the register unless the prescribed fee has been
paid to the Director-General.
(4) No such assignment or transmission shall have effect
against third parties unless so recorded in the register.
89. In the absence of any agreement to the contrary Joint ownership of
between the parties, joint owners of a patent application or patent applications
or patents.
patent may, separately, assign or transmit their rights in the
patent application or patent, exploit the patented invention
and take action against any person exploiting the patented
invention without their consent, but may only jointly
withdraw the patent application, surrender the patent or
conclude a licence contract.
C H A P T E R X V I I
LICENCE CONTRACTS
90. For the purposes of this Part licence contract means Interpretation.
any contract by which the owner of a patent (hereinafter
referred to as “the licensor”) grants to another person or
enterprise (hereinafter referred to as the “the licensee”) a
licence to do all or any of the acts referred to in paragraph
(a) of subsection (1) and subsection (3) of section 84.
91. (1) A licence contract shall be in writing signed by Form and record
or on behalf of the contracting parties. of licence
contract.
(2) Upon a request in writing signed by or on behalf of
the contracting parties, the Director-General shall, on
payment of the prescribed fee, record in the register such
particulars relating to the contract as the parties thereto might
wish to have so recorded :
Provided that the parties shall not be required to disclose
or have recorded any other particulars relating to the said
contract.
70 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
Rights of licensee. 92. In the absence of any provision to the contrary in
the licence contract, the licensee shall—
(a) be entitled to do all or any of the acts referred to in
paragraph (a) of subsection (1) and subsection (3)
of section 84 within the territory of Sri Lanka,
without limitation as to time and through application
of the patented invention ;
(b) not be entitled to assign or transmit his rights under
the licence contract or grant sub-licences to third
parties.
Rights of the 93. (1) In the absence of any provision to the contrary
licensor. in the licence contract, the licensor may grant further licences
to third parties in respect of the same patent or perform all
or any of the acts referred to in paragraph (a) of subsection
(1) and subsection (3) of section 84.
(2) Where the licence contract provides the licence to
be exclusive, and unless it is expressly provided otherwise
in such contract, the licensor shall not grant further licences
to third parties in respect of the same patent or perform all
or any of the acts referred to in paragraph (a) of subsection
(1) and subsection (3) of section 84.
Invalid clauses 94. Any term or condition in a licence contract shall be
in licence null and void in so far as it imposes upon the licensee, in the
contracts.
industrial or commercial field, restrictions not derived from
the rights conferred by this Part on the owner of the patent,
or unnecessary for the safeguarding of such rights :
Provided that—
(a) restrictions concerning the scope, extent or duration
of exploitation of the patented invention, or the
geographical area in or the quality or quantity of
the products in connection with, which the patented
invention may be exploited ; and
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 71
(b) obligations imposed upon the licensee to abstain
from all acts capable of prejudicing the validity of
the patent,
shall not be deemed to constitute such restrictions.
95. Where, before the expiration of the licence contract, Effect of patent
any of the following events occur in respect of the patent application not
being granted or
application or patent referred to in such contract—
patent being
declared null and
(a) the patent application is withdrawn ; void.
(b) the patent application is finally rejected ;
(c) the patent is surrendered ;
(d) the patent is declared null and void ; or
(e) the registration of the licence contract is invalidated,
the licensee shall no longer be required to make any payment
to the licensor under the licence contract, and shall be entitled
to repayment of the payments already made :
Provided that the licensor shall not be required to make
any repayment, or repayment only in part, if he can prove
that any such repayment would be inequitable under the
circumstances, in particular if the licensee has effectively
profited from the licence.
96. The Director-General shall— Expiry,
termination or
invalidation of
(a) if he is satisfied that a recorded licence contract
licence contract to
has expired or been terminated, record that fact in be recorded.
the register upon a request in writing to that effect
signed by or on behalf of the parties thereto ;
(b) record in the register the expiry, termination or
invalidation of a licence contract under any
provision of this Part.
72 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
Licence contracts 97. (1) Where the Director-General has reasonable
involving cause to believe that any licence contract or any amendment
payments abroad.
or renewal thereof—
(a) which involves the payment of royalties abroad ; or
(b) which by reason of other circumstances relating to
such licence contract,
is detrimental to the economic development of Sri Lanka,
he shall in writing communicate such fact to the Governor
of the Central Bank and transmit all papers in his custody
relevant to a decision on such matter to the Governor of the
Central Bank.
(2) Where on receipt of any communication under
subsection (1) the Governor of the Central Bank informs the
Director-General in writing that the said licence contract or
any amendment or renewal thereof is detrimental to the
economic development of Sri Lanka, the Director-General
shall cancel and invalidate the record of such contract in the
register.
(3) The provisions of this section shall apply, mutatis
mutandis, to assignments and transmissions.
(4) The provisions of this Chapter shall apply, mutatis
mutandis, to sub-licence.
(5) The provisions of this Chapter shall have no
application to a licence referred to in subsection (2) of section
86.
CHAPTER XVIII
SURRENDERAND NULLITYOF PATENT
Surrender of 98. (1) The registered owner of a patent may surrender
patent. the patent by a declaration in writing signed by him or by
any person authorized by him on his behalf and shall submitt
it to the Director-General.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 73
(2) The surrender may be limited to one or more claims
of the patent.
(3) The Director-General shall, on receipt of the said
declaration record it in the register or cause it to be registered
and shall cause such record to be published in the Gazette.
(4) The surrender shall take effect from the date of
receipt of such declaration by the Director-General.
(5) Where a licence contract in respect of a patent is
recorded in the register, the Director-General shall not, in
the absence of provision to the contrary in such licence
contract, accept or record the said surrender except upon
receipt of a signed declaration by which every licensee or
sub-licensee on record consents to the said surrender, unless
the requirement of his consent is expressly waived in the
licence contract.
99. (1) The Court may on the application of any person Nullity of patent.
showing a legitimate interest, or of any Competent Authority
including the Director-General, to which the owner of the
patent and every assignee, licensee or sub-licensee on record
shall be made party, declare the patent null and void on any
one or more of the following grounds:—
(a) that what is claimed as an invention in the patent is
not an invention within the meaning of subsection
(1) of section 62, or is excluded from protection
under subsection (3) of section 62, or subsection
(1) of section 79, or is not patentable due to the
failure to satisfy the requirements of sections 63,
64, 65 and 66 ; or
(b) that the description or the claims, fails to satisfy
the requirements of subsections (3) and (4) of
section71; or
(c) that any drawings required for the understanding of
the claimed invention have not been furnished ; or
74 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
(d) that the right to the patent belongs to a person other
than the person to whom the patent was granted :
Provided that the patent has not been assigned to the
person to whom the right to the patent belongs.
(2) (a) Where the provisions of subsection (1) apply
only to some of the claims or some parts of a claim, such
claims or parts of a claim may be declared null and void by
the court.
(b) The nullity of part of a claim shall be declared in
the form of a corresponding limitation of the claim in
question.
(3) (a) An assignee, licensee or sub-licensee, as the case
may be, who has been made party to the application under
subsection (1), shall be entitled to join in the proceedings in
the absence of any provision to the contrary in any contract
or agreement with the owner of the patent.
(b) Where the application to Court is on the ground
referred to in paragraph (d) of subsection (1), the applicant
shall give notice of the application to the person to whom
the right to the patent is alleged to belong.
Date and effect of 100. (1) Upon a final decision of the Court declaring
nullity.
total or partial nullity of a patent, the patent shall be deemed
to have been null and void, totally or partially, as the case
may be, as from the date of the grant of such patent.
(2) When a declaration of nullity becomes final the
Registrar of the Court shall notify the Director-General who
shall record the said declaration in the register and cause it
to be published in the Gazette.
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 75
PART V
CHAPTER XIX
MARKSAND TRADE NAMES
101. For the purposes of this Part, unless the context Definitions.
otherwise requires—
“certification mark” means a mark indicating that the
goods or services in connection with which it is
used are certified by the proprietor of the mark in
respect of origin, material, mode of manufacture
of goods or performance of services, quality,
accuracy or other characteristics ;
“collective mark” means any visible sign designated as
such and serving to distinguish the origin or any
other common characteristic of goods or services
of different enterprises which use the mark under
the control of the registered owner ;
“enterprise” means any business, industry or other
activity carried on by an individual, partnership,
company, or co-operative society wherever
registered or incorporated and whether registered
or not under any law for the time being in force
relating to companies, co-operative societies or
businesses engaged in or proposing to engage in
any business and includes any business undertaking
of the Government or any State Corporation whether
carrying on business in Sri Lanka or otherwise ;
“false trade description” means a trade description which
is false or misleading in a material respect as regards
the goods or services to which it is applied, and
includes every alteration of a trade description,
whether by way of addition, effacement or
otherwise, where that alteration makes the
description false or misleading in a material respect,
76 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
and the fact that a trade description is a trade mark
or part of a trade mark shall not prevent such trade
description being a false trade description within
the meaning of this Part ;
“geographical indication” means an indication which
identifies any goods as originating in the territory
of a country, or a region or locality in that territory,
where a given quality, reputation or other
characteristic of the good is essentially attributable
to its geographical origin ;
“goods” means anything which is the subject of trade,
manufacture or merchandise and includes services;
“indication of source” means any expression or sign used
to indicate that a product or service originates in a
given conutry or group of countries, region, or
locality ;
“mark” means a trade mark or service mark ;
“name” includes any abbreviation of a name ;
“person” means manufacturer, dealer, trader or owner
and includes any body of persons, corporate or
unincorporate ;
“service mark” means any visible sign serving to
distinguish the services of one enterprise from those
of an other enterprise ;
“trade description” means any description, statement
or other indication, direct or indirect—
(a) as to the number, quantity, measure, gauge,
or weight of any goods ; or
(b) as to the place or country in which any goods
were made or produced ; or
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 77
(c) as to the mode of manufacturing or producing
any goods ; or
(d) as to the material of which any goods are
composed ; or
(e) as to any goods being the subject of an
existing copyright, related rights, industrial
design or patent or any other matter protected
under this Act ; or
(f) as to the quality, kind or nature of the
services; or
(g) as to the standard of quality of any goods,
according to a classification commonly used
or recognized in the trade ; or
(h) as to the fitness for purpose, strength,
performance or behaviour of any goods,
and the use of any figure, word or mark which,
according to the custom of the trade, is commonly
taken to be an indication of any of the above
matters shall be deemed to be a trade description
within the meaning of this Part ;
“trade mark” means any visible sign serving to
distinguish the goods of one enterprise from those
of another enterprise ; and
“trade name” means the name or designation identifying
the enterprise of a natural or legal person.
78 Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003
CHAPTER XX
ADMISSIBILITYOF MARKS
Admissibility of 102. (1) The exclusive right to a mark conferred by this
marks. Part shall be acquired, subject to the succeeding provisions,
by registration.
(2) Registration of a mark may be granted to the person
who—
(a) is the first to fulfill the conditions of a valid
application; or
(b) is the first to validly claim the earliest priority for
his application :
Provided however such mark shall not be inadmissible
under sections 103 and 104.
(3) A mark may consist in particular, of arbitrary or
fanciful designations, names, pseudonyms, geographical
names, slogans, devices, reliefs, letters, numbers, labels,
envelopes, emblems, prints, stamps, seals, vignettes,
selvedges, borders and edgings, combinations or
arrangements of colours and shapes of goods or containers.
Marks 103. (1) A mark shall not be registered—
inadmissible on
objective grounds.
(a) which consists of shapes or forms imposed by the
inherent nature of the goods or services or by their
industrial function ;
(b) which consists exclusively of a sign or indication
which may serve, in the course of trade, to designate
the kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, value,
place of origin or time of production, or of supply,
of the goods or services concerned ;
Intellectual Property Act, No. 36 of 2003 79
(c) which consists exclusively of a sign or indication
which has become, in the current language or in
the bona fide and established practices of trade in
SriLanka, a customary designation of the goods or
services concerned ;
(d) which, is incapable of distinguishing the goods or
services of one enterprise from those of another
enterprise ;
(e) which consists of any scandalous design or is
contrary to morality or public order or which, in
the opinion of the Director-General or of any court
to which the matter may be referred to, as the case
may be, is likely to offend the religious or racial
susceptibilities of any community ;
(f) which is likely to mislead trade circles or the public
as to the nature, the source, geographical indication
the manufacturing process, the characteristics, or
the suitability for their purposes, of the goods or
services concerned ;
(g) which does not represent in a special or particular
manner the name of an individual or enterprise ;
(h) which is, according to its ordinary signification, a
geographical name or surname ;
(i) which reproduces or imitates armorial bearings,
flags or other emblems, initials, names or
abbreviated names of any State or any inter-
governmental international organization or any
organization created by international convention,
unless authorized by the Competent Authority of
that State or international organization ;
(j) which reproduces or imitates official signs or hall-
marks of a State, unless authorized by the
Competent Authority of that State ;
[TRUNCATED: processed first 80 of 163 pages]