EVIDENCE
AN ORDINANCE TO CONSOLIDATE, DEFINE, AND AMEND THE LAW OF
EVIDENCE.
Ordinance Nos,
14 of 1895
15 of 1904
16 of 1925
25 of 1927
18 of 1928
1 of 1946
Act Nos,
3 of 1961
10 of 1988
14 of 1995
33 of 1998
32 of 1999
29 of 2005
6 of 2021
PART I
RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
Short title 1. This Ordinance may be cited as the Evidence Ordinance.
Extent 2. (1) This Ordinance shall apply to all judicial proceedings
in or before any court other than courts martial, but not to
proceedings before an arbitrator
Repeal (2) All rules of evidence not contained in any written law
so far as such rules are inconsistent with any of the
provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed.
Interpretation. 3. In this Ordinance the following words and expressions are
used in the following senses, unless a contrary intention
appears from the context :-
'court' includes all Judges and Magistrates, and all
persons, except arbitrators, legally authorized to take
evidence.
'Fact' means and includes -
(a) any thing, state of things, or relation of things
capable of being perceived by the senses ;
(b) any mental condition of which any person is
conscious ;
Illustrations
(a) That there are certain objects arranged in a certain
order in a certain place is a fact.
(b) That a man heard or saw something is a fact.
(c) That a man said certain words is a fact.
(d) That a man holds a certain opinion, has a certain
intention, acts in good faith, or fraudulently, or uses a
particular word, or is or was at a specified time
conscious of a particular sensation, is a fact.
(e) That a man has a certain reputation is a fact.
Relevant One fact is said to be relevant to another when the one is
connected with the other in any of the ways referred to in
the provisions of this Ordinance relating to the relevancy of
facts.
'Facts in means and includes-
issue'
any facts from which, either by itself or in connection
with other facts, the existence, non-existence, nature
or extent of any right, liability, or disability, asserted or
denied in any suit or proceeding, necessarily follows.
Explanation
- Whenever, under the provisions of the law for the
time being in force relating to Civil Procedure, any court
records an issue of fact to be asserted or denied, in the
answer to such issue, is a fact in issue.
Illustrations
A is accused of the murder of B. At his trial the
following facts may be in issue:-
That A caused B's death
That A intended to cause B's death
That A had received grave and sudden provocation from
B.
That A, at the time of doing the act which caused B's
death, was by reason of unsoundness of mind,
incapable of knowing its nature.
Document 'Document' means any matter expressed or described upon
any substance by means of letters, figures, or marks or by
more than one of those means, intended to be used, or
which may be used, for the purpose of recording that
matter.
Illustration
A writing is a document Words printed, lithographed,
or photographed are documents. A map or plan is a
document. An inscription on a metal plate or stone is a
document. A caricature is a document.
Evidence 'Evidence' means and includes -
(a) all statements which the court permits or requires
to be made before it by witnesses in relation to matters
of fact under inquiry: such statements are called oral
evidence:
(b) all documents produced for the inspection of the
court; such documents are called documentary evidence.
Proved A fact is said to be proved when, after considering the
matters before it, the court either believes it to exist or
considers its existence so probable that a prudent man
might, under the circumstances of the particular case, to act
upon the supposition that it exists.
Disproved A fact is said to be disproved when, after considering the
matters before it, the court either believes that it does not
exist, or considers its non-existence so probable that a
prudent man might, under the circumstances of the
particular case, to act upon the supposition that it does not
exist.
Not A fact is said not to be proved when it is neither proved nor
Proved. disproved.
May presume. 4. (1) Whenever it is provided, by this Ordinance that
the court may presume a fact, it may either regard
such fact as proved, unless and until it is
disproved, or may call for proof of it.
Shall (2) Whenever it is directed by this Ordinance that the
presume. court shall presume a fact, it shall regard such fact as
proved unless and until it is disproved.
Conclusive (3) When one fact is declared by this Ordinance to be
proof. conclusive proof of another, the court shall on
proof of the one fact regard the other as proved,
and shall not allow evidence to be given for the
purpose of disproving it.
CHAPTER II
OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS
Evidence may be 5. Evidence may be given in any suit or proceeding of the
given of facts in existence or non-existence of every fact in issue, and of
issue and relevant such other facts as are hereinafter declared to be relevant
facts. and of no others.
Explanation
- This section shall not enable any person to give evidence
of a fact which he is disentitled to prove by any provision of
the law for the time being in force relating to Civil
Procedure.
Illustrations
(a) A is tried for the murder of B by beating him with a club
with the intention of causing his death.
At A's trial the following facts are in issue:-
A's beating B with the club;
A's causing B's death by such beating;
A's intention to cause B's death.
(b) A, is a party to a suit, does not comply with a notice given
by B. The other party, to produce for B's inspection a
document referred to in A's pleadings. This section does not
enable A to put such document in evidence on his behalf in
such suit, otherwise than in accordance with the conditions
prescribed by section 104 of the Civil Procedure Code.
Relevancy of facts 6. Facts which though not in issue are so connected with a fact
forming part of in issue as to form part of the same transaction are relevant,
same transaction. whether they occurred at the same time and place or at
[2, 6 of 2021] different times and places.
Illustrations
(a) A is accused of the murder of B by beating him.
Whatever was said or done by A or B or the bystanders
at the beating, or so shortly before or after it as to form
part of the transaction is a relevant fact.
(b) A is accused of waging war against the Republic
by taking part in an armed insurrection in which
property is destroyed, troops are attacked, and jails are
broken open. The occurrence of these facts is relevant as
forming part of the general transaction, though A may
not have been present at all of them.
(c) A sues P for a libel contained in a letter forming
part of a correspondence. Letters between the parties
relating to the subject out of which the libel arose and
forming part of the correspondence in which it is
contained are relevant facts, though they do not
contain the libel itself.
(d) The question is, whether certain goods ordered from
B were delivered to A. The goods were delivered to
several intermediate persons successively. Each
delivery is a relevant fact.
Facts which are the 7. Facts which are the occasion, cause, or effect, immediate or
occasion, cause, or otherwise, of relevant facts, or facts in issue, or which
effect of facts in constitute the state of things under which they happened, or
issue. which afforded an opportunity for their occurrence or
transaction, are relevant.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A robbed B. The facts that
shortly before the robbery B went to a fair with money
in his possession, and that he showed it, or mentioned
the fact that he had it, to third persons, are relevant.
(b) The question is whether A murdered B. Marks on the
ground, produced by a struggle at or near the place
where the murder was committed, are relevant facts;
(c) The question is whether A poisoned B. The state of
B's health before the symptoms ascribed to poison, and
habits of B, known to A, which afforded an
opportunity for the administration of poison, are relevant
facts.
Motive, or 8. (1) Any fact is relevant, which shows or constitutes a motive
preparation. or preparation for any fact in issue or relevant fact.
Previous or subsequent conduct.
(2) The conduct of any party, or of any agent to any party,
to any suit or proceeding in reference to such suit or
proceeding or in reference to any fact in issue therein or
relevant thereto, and the conduct of any person an offence
against whom is the subject of any proceeding, is
relevant, if such conduct influences or is influenced by any
fact in issue or relevant fact, and whether it was previous or
subsequent therein.
Explanation 1
- The word 'conduct' in this section does not include
statements, unless those statements accompany and explain
acts other than statements, but this explanation is not to effect
the relevancy of statements under any other section of this
Ordinance.
Explanation 2
- When the conduct of any person is relevant, any statement
made to him or in his presence and hearing, which effects
such conduct, is relevant.
Illustrations
(a) A is tried for the murder of B. The facts that A, murdered
C, that B knew that A had murdered C, and that B had tried to
extort money from A by threatening to make his knowledge
public, are relevant.
(b) A sues B upon an instrument for the payment of money. B
denies the making of the instrument. The fact that at the time
when the instrument was alleged to be made B required
money for a particular purpose is relevant.
(c) A is tried for the murder of B by Police. The fact that
before the death of B, A procured poison similar to that which
was administered to B, is relevant.
(d) The question is, whether a certain document is the will
of A. The facts that not long before the date of the alleged
will A made inquiry into matters to which the provisions of
the alleged will relate, that he consulted proctors in
reference to making the will, and that he caused drafts of
other wills to be prepared, of which he did not approve, are
relevant.
(e) A is accused of a crime. The facts that either before or at
the time of, or after the alleged crime, A provided evidence
which would tend to give to the facts of the case an
appearance favorable to himself, or that he destroyed or
concealed evidence, or prevented the presence or procured
the absence of persons who might have been witnesses, or
suborned persons to give false evidence respecting it, are
relevant.
(f) The question is, whether A robbed B. The facts that after B
was robbed C said in A's presence, 'the police are coming to
look for the man who robbed B', and that immediately
afterwards A ran away, are relevant.
(g) The question is, whether A owes B Rs: 10,000. The
facts that A asked C to lend him money, and that D said to
C in A's presence and hearing, 'I advise you not to trust A,
for he owes B 10,000 rupees' and that A went away without
any answer, are relevant facts.
(h) The question is whether A committed a crime. The fact
that A absconded after receiving a letter warning him that
inquiry was being made for the criminal, and the contents
of the letter, are relevant.
(i) A is accused of a crime. The facts that after the
commission of the alleged crime he absconded, or was in
possession of property or the proceeds of property acquired
by the crime, or attempted to conceal things which were or
might have been used in committing it, are relevant.
(j) The question is, whether A was ravished.
The fact that shortly after the alleged rape she made a
complaint relating to the crime, the circumstances under
which and the terms in which the complaint was made, are
relevant. The fact that, without making a complaint, she
said that she had been ravished, is not relevant as conduct
under this section, though it may be relevant as a dying
declaration, under section 32, subsection (1), or as
corroborative evidence under section 157.
(k) The question is whether A was robbed.
The fact that soon after the alleged robbery he made a
complaint, relating to the offence, the circumstances under
which and the terms in which the complaint was made, are
relevant. The fact that he said he had been robbed, without
making any complaint, is not relevant as conduct under this
section though it may be relevant as a dying declaration under
section 32, subsection (1), or as corroborative evidence
under section 157.
Facts necessary to 9. Facts necessary to explain or introduce a fact in issue or
explain or relevant fact, or which support or rebut an inference
introduce relevant suggested by a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which
facts. establish the identity of anything or person whose identity
is relevant, or fix the time or place at which any fact in
issue or relevant fact happened, or which show the relation
of parties by whom any such fact was transacted, are
relevant in so far as they are necessary for that purpose.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether a given document is the
will of A. The state of A's property and of his family at
the date of the alleged will may be relevant facts.
(b)A sues B for a libel imputing disgraceful conduct to
A. B affirms that the matter alleged to be libelous is true.
The position and relation of the parties at the time when
the libel was published may be relevant facts as
introductory to the facts in issue. The particulars of a
dispute between A and B about a matter unconnected
with the alleged libel are irrelevant, though the fact
that there was a dispute may be relevant if it affected
the relations between A and B.
(c) A is accused of a crime. The fact that soon after the
commission of the crime A absconded from his house,
is relevant, under section 8, as conduct subsequent to
and affected by facts in issue. The fact that at the time
when he left home he had sudden and urgent business
at the place to which he went, is relevant, as tending to
explain the fact that he left home suddenly. The details
of the business on which he left are not relevant,
except in so far as they are necessary to show that the
business was sudden and urgent.
(d) A sues B for inducing C to break a contract of
service made by him with A. C, on leaving A's service,
says to A, 'I am leaving you because B has made me a
better offer'. This statement is a relevant fact as
explanatory of C's conduct, which is relevant as a fact
in issue.
(e) A, accused of theft, is seen to give the stolen
property to B, who is seen to give it to A's wife. B
says, as he delivers it, 'A says you are to hide this'. B's
statement is relevant, as explanatory of a fact which is
part of the transaction.
(f) A is tried for a riot, and is proved to have marched
at the head of a mob. The cries of the mob are relevant
as explanatory of the nature of the transaction.
Things said or 10. Where there is reasonable ground to believe that two or
done by more persons have conspired together to commit an
conspirator in offence or an actionable wrong, anything said, done, or
reference to written by any one of such persons in reference to their
common intention. common intention, after the time when such intention was
[3, 6 of 2021] first entertained by any one of them, is a relevant fact as
against each of the persons believed to be so conspiring, as
well for the purpose of proving the existence of the
conspiracy as for the purpose of showing that any such
person was a party to it.
Illustrations
Reasonable ground exists for believing that 'A' has joined
in a conspiracy to wage war against the Republic.
The facts that B procured arms in Europe for the purpose
of the conspiracy, C collected money in Colombo for a
like object, D persuaded persons to join the conspiracy in
Kandy, E published writings advocating the object in view at
Galle, and F transmitted from Kalutara to G at Negombo
the money which C had collected at Colombo, and the
contents of a letter written by H giving an account of the
conspiracy, are each relevant, both to prove the existence of
the conspiracy and to prove A's complicity in it, although he
may have been ignorant of all of them, and although the
persons by whom they were done were strangers to him, and
although they may have taken place before he joined the
conspiracy or after he left it.
When facts not 11. Facts not otherwise relevant are relevant-
otherwise relevant
(a) if they are inconsistent with any fact in issue or
are relevant.
relevant fact;
(b) if by themselves or in connection with other facts
they make the existence or non-existence of any fact
in issue or relevant fact highly probable or
improbable.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A committed a crime at
Colombo on a certain day. The fact that on that day A was at
Galle is relevant. The fact that near the time when the crime
was committed A was at a distance from the place where it
was committed, which would render it highly improbable,
though not impossible, that he committed it, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A committed a crime. The
circumstances are such that the crime must have been
committed either by A, B, C, or D. Every fact which
shows that the crime could have been committed by no
one else, and that it was not committed by either B, C, or
D. is relevant.
In suits for 12.
damages facts
In suits in which damages are claimed, any fact which will
tending to enable
enable the court to determine the amount of damages
Court to determine
which ought to be awarded is relevant.
amount are
relevant.
Facts relevant 13.
Where the question is as to the existence of any right or
when right or
custom the following facts are relevant:-
custom is in
(a) any transaction by which the right or custom in
question.
question was created, claimed, modified, recognized,
asserted, or denied, or which was inconsistent with its
existence.
(b) Particular instances in which the right or custom
was claimed, recognized, or exercised, or in which its
exercise was disputed, asserted, or departed from.
Illustration
The question is, whether, A has a right to a fishery. A deed
conferring the fishery on A's ancestors, a mortgage of the
fishery by A's father, a subsequent grant of the fishery by A's
father irreconcilable with the mortgage, particular instances
in which A's father exercised the right, or in which the
exercise of the right was stopped by A's neighbours, are
relevant facts.
Facts showing 14. Facts showing the existence of any state of mind - such
existence of state of intention, knowledge, good faith, negligence, rashness, ill-
mind or of body, or will, or good-will towards any particular person, or
bodily feeling. showing the existence of any state of body or bodily
feeling - are relevant, when the existence of any such state of
mind, or body, or bodily feeling is in issue or relevant.
Explanation 1
- A fact relevant as showing the existence of a relevant
state of mind must show that the state of mind
exists, not generally, but in reference to the particular
matter in question.
Explanation 2
- But where, upon the trial of a person accused of an
offence, the previous commission by the accused of
an offence is relevant within the meaning of this
section, the previous conviction of such person shall
also be a relevant fact.
Illustrations
(a) A is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing
them to be stolen. It is proved that he was in possession
of a particular stolen article. The fact that at the same
time he was in possession of many other stolen articles
is relevant, an tending to show that he knew each and
all of the articles of which he was in possession to be
stolen.
(b) A is accused of fraudulently delivering to another
person a counterfeit coin which, at the time when he
delivered it, he knew to be counterfeit. The fact that at
the time of its delivery A was possessed of a number
of other pieces of counterfeit coin is relevant. The fact
that A had been previously convicted of delivering to
another person as genuine a counterfeit coin knowing it
to be counterfeit is relevant.
(c) A sues B for a damage done by a dog of B's which
B knew to be ferocious. The facts that the dog had
previously bitten X, Y and Z, and that they had made
complaints to B, are relevant.
(d) The question is whether A, the acceptor of a bill of
exchange, knew that the name of the payee was
fictitious. The fact that A had accepted other bills drawn
in the same manner before they could have been
transmitted to him by the payee. If the payee had been a
real person, is relevant, as showing that A knew that
the payee was a fictitious person.
(e) A is accused of defaming B by publishing an
imputation intended to harm the reputation of B. The
fact of previous publications by A respecting B,
showing ill-will on the part of A towards B, is
relevant, as proving A's intention to harm B's reputation
by the particular publication in question. The facts that
there was no previous quarrel between A and B, and
that A repeated the matter complained of as he heard
it, are relevant, as showing that A did not intend to
harm the reputation of B.
(f) A is sued by B for fraudulently representing to B
that C was solvent, whereby B, being induced to trust
C, who was insolvent, suffered loss. The fact that at
the time when A represented C to be solvent, C was
supposed to be solvent by his neighbours and by
persons dealing with him, is relevant, as showing that A
made the representation in good faith.
(g) A is sued by B for the price of work done by B
upon a house of which A is owner, by the order of C,
a contractor. A's defense is that B's contract was with
C. The fact that A paid C for the work in question is
relevant, as proving that A did in good faith make
over to C the management of the work in question, so
that C was in a position to contract with B on C's own
account, and not as agent for A.
(h) A is accused of the dishonest misappropriation of
property which he had found, and the question is,
whether, when he appropriated it, he believed in good
faith that the real owner could not be found. The fact
that public notice of the loss of the property had been
given in the place where A was is relevant, as
showing that A did not in good faith believe that the
real owner of the property could not be found. The
fact that A knew, or had reason to believe, that the
notice was given fraudulently by C, who had heard of
the loss of the property and wished to set up a false
claim to it, is relevant as showing that the fact that A
knew of the notice did not disprove A's good faith.
(i) A is charged with shooting at B with intent to kill
him. In order to show A's intent, the fact of A having
previously shot at B may be proved.
(j) A is charged with sending threatening letters to B.
Threatening letters previously sent by A to B may be
proved as showing the intention of the letters.
(k) The question is, whether A has been guilty of
cruelty towards B, his wife. Expressions of their feeling
towards each other shortly before or after the alleged
cruelty are relevant facts.
(l) The question is, whether A's death was caused by
poison. Statements made by A during his illness as to
his symptoms are relevant facts.
(m) The question is, what was the state of A's health
at the time when an assurance on his life was
effected. Statements made by A as to the state of his
health at or near the time in question are relevant
facts.
(n) A sues B for negligence in providing him with a
carriage for hire not reasonably fit for use, whereby A
was injured. The fact that B's attention was drawn on
other occasions to the defect of that particular
carriage is relevant. The fact that B was habitually
negligent about the carriages which he let to hire is
irrelevant.
(o) A is tried for the murder of B by intentionally
shooting him dead. The fact that A on other occasions
shot at B is relevant as showing his intention to shoot
B. The fact that A was in the habit of shooting at people
with intent to murder them is irrelevant.
(p) A is tried for crime. The fact that he said
something indicating an intention to commit that
particular crime is relevant. The fact that he said
something indicating a general disposition to commit
crimes of that class is irrelevant.
Facts bearing on 15. When there is a question whether an act was accidental or
question whether intentional or done with a particular knowledge or
act was accidental intention, the fact that such act formed part of a series of
or intentional. similar occurrences, in each of which the person doing the
act was concerned, is relevant.
Illustrations
(a)A is accused of burning down his house in order to
obtain money for which it is insured. The facts that A
lived in several houses successively, each of which he
insured. In each of which a fire occurred, and after each
of which fires A received payment from different
insurance office, are relevant as tending to show that
the fires were not accidental.
(b) A is employed to receive money from the debtors of
B. It is A's duty to make entries in a book showing the
amounts received by him. He makes an entry showing
that on a particular occasion he received less than he
really did receive. The question is, whether this false
entry was accidental or intentional. The facts that
other entries made by A in the same book are false,
and that the false entry is in each case in favor of A,
are relevant.
(c) A is accused of fraudulently delivering to B a
counterfeit rupee. The question is, whether the
delivery of the rupee was accidental. The facts that
soon before or soon after the delivery to B, A
delivered counterfeit rupee to C, D, and E, are
relevant, as showing that the delivery to B was not
accidental.
Existence of course 16. When there is a question whether a particular act was
of business, when done, the existence of any course of business, according to
relevant. which it naturally would have been done, is a relevant fact.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether a particular letter was
dispatched. The fact that it was the ordinary course of
business for all letters put in certain place to be
carried to the post, and that that particular letter was put
in that place, are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether a particular letter reached
A. The facts that it was posted in due course and was
not returned through the dead letter office are
relevant.
Admissions 17. (1) An admission is a statement, oral or
defined. documentary, which suggests any inference as to
any fact in issue or relevant fact, and which is
made by any of the persons and under the
circumstances hereinafter mentioned.
(2) A confession is an admission made at any time
Confessions
by a person accused of an offence stating or
defined.
suggesting the inference that he committed that
offence.
Admission by 18. (1) Statements made by a party to the proceeding,
party to or by an agent to any such party, whom the court
proceeding, or his regards, under the circumstances of the case, as
agent. expressly or impliedly authorized by him to make
them, are admissions.
(2) Statements made by parties to suits suing or
By suitor in
sued in representative character are not admissions,
representative
unless they were made while the party making
character;
them held that character.
(3) Statements made by -
(a) persons who have any proprietary or
By party
pecuniary interest in the subject- matter of the
interested in
proceeding, and who make the statement in
subject-
their character of persons so interested; or
matter.
(b) persons from whom the parties to the suit
By person
have derived their interest in the subject-
from whom
matter of the suit,
Interest
derived.
are admissions if they are made during the
continuance of the interest of the persons making
the statements.
Admissions by 19. Statements made by persons whose position or liability it is
persons whose necessary to prove as against any party to the suit are
position must be admissions if such statements would be relevant as against
proved as against such persons in relation to such position or liability in a
party to suit. suit brought by or against them, and if they are made whilst
the person making them occupies such position or is
subject to such liability.
Illustration
A undertakes to collect rents for B sues A for not collecting
rent from C to B. A denies that rent was due from C to B. A
statement by C that he owed B rent is an admission, and is
a relevant fact as against A. If A denies that C did owe rent to
B.
Admissions by 20. Statements made by persons to whom a party to the suit
persons expressly has expressly referred for information in reference to a
referred to by party matter in dispute, are admissions.
to suit.
Illustration
The question is whether a horse sold by A to B is sound. A
says to B, 'Go and ask C; C knows all about it'. C's statement
is an admission.
Proof of 21. Admissions are relevant and may be proved as against the
admissions against person who makes them, or his representative in interest; but
the person who they cannot be proved by or on behalf of the person who
makes them or his makes them or by his representative in interest, except in
representative in the following cases.
interest.
(a) an admission may be proved by or on behalf of the
person making it when it is of such a nature that, if
the person making it were dead, it would be relevant
as between third persons under section 32.
(b) an admission may be proved by or on behalf of
the person making it when it consists of a statement
of the existence of any state of mind or body, relevant
or in issue, made at or about the time when such state
of mind or body existed, and is accompanied by
conduct rendering its falsehood improbable;
(c) an admission may be proved by or on behalf of the
person making it if it is relevant otherwise than as an
admission.
Illustrations
(a) The question between A and B is whether, a certain deed
is or is not forged. A affirms that it is genuine. B that it is
forged. A may prove a statement by B that the deed is
genuine and B may prove a statement by A that the deed is
forged; but A cannot prove a statement by himself that the
deed is genuine nor can B prove a statement that by
himself that the deed is forged.
(b) A, the captain of a ship, is tried for casting her away.
Evidence is given to show that the ship was taken out of
her proper course. A produces a book kept by him in the
ordinary course of his business, showing observations
alleged to have been taken by him from day to day and
indicating that the ship was not taken out of her proper
course. A may prove these statements, because they would
be admissible between third parties if he were dead, under
section 32, sub-section (2).
(c) A is accused of a crime committed by him at Colombo.
He produces a letter written by himself and dated at Jaffna
on that day, and bearing the Jaffna postmark of that day. The
statement in the date of the letter is admissible, because if
A were dead it would be admissible under section 32,
subsection (2).
(d) A is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing them
to be stolen. He offers to prove that he refused to sell them
below their value. A may prove these statements though they
are admissions, because they are explanatory of conduct
influenced by facts in issue.
(e) A is accused of fraudulently having in his possession
counterfeit coin, which he knew to be counterfeit. He
offers to prove that he asked a skilful person to examine
the coin, as he doubted whether it was counterfeit or not
and that that person did examine it and told him it was
genuine. A may prove these facts for the reasons stated in the
last preceding illustration.
When oral 22. Oral admissions as to the contents of a document are not
admissions as to relevant, unless and until the party proposing to prove
contents of them shows that he is entitled to give secondary evidence
documents are of the contents of such documents under the rules hereinafter
relevant. contained, or unless the genuineness of a document produced
is in question.
Admissions in civil 23. In civil cases no admission is relevant if it is made either
cases when upon an express condition that evidence of it is not to be
relevant. given, or under circumstances from which the Court can infer
that the parties agreed together that evidence of it should not
be given.
Explanation
- Nothing in this section shall be taken to exempt any
advocate or proctor from giving evidence of any matter of
which he may be compelled to give evidence under section
126.
Confession caused 24. A confession made by an accused person is irrelevant in a
by inducement, criminal proceeding if the making of the confession
threat, or promise appears to the court to have been caused by any inducement,
irrelevant. threat, or promise having reference to the charge against the
accused person, proceeding from a person in authority, or
proceeding from another person in the presence of a person
in authority and with his sanction, and which inducement
threat, or promise is sufficient in the opinion of the court
to give the accused person grounds, which would appear to
him reasonable, for supposing that by making it he would
gain any advantage or avoid any evil of a temporal nature in
reference to the proceedings against him.
Confession made 25. (1) No confession made to a police officer shall be
to a police officer proved as against a person accused of any offence.
not to be proved
(2) No confession made to a forest officer with
Confession
against an accused
respect to an act made punishable under the Forest
made to a
person.
Ordinance, or to an excise officer with respect to an
forest
act made punishable under the Excise Ordinance,
officer are
shall be proved as against any person making such
an excise
confession.
officer not
to be
proved
against
person
making
confession.
Confession made 26. (1) No confession made by any person whilst he is
by any person in custody of a police officer, unless it be made in
while in custody of the immediate presence of a Magistrate shall be
a police officer not proved as against such person.
to be proved
(2) No confession made by any person in respect of
Confession
against him.
an act made punishable under the Forest Ordinance
made by
or the Excise Ordinance, whilst such person is in the
any person
custody of forest officer or an excise officer,
while in
respectively, shall be proved as against such person,
the
unless such confession is made in the immediate
custody of
presence of a Magistrate.
a forest
officer or
an excise
officer not
to be
proved
against
him.
How much of 27. (1) Provided that, when any fact is deposed to as
information discovered in consequence of information received
received from from a person accused of any offence, in the
accused may be custody of a police officer, so much of such
proved. information, whether it amounts to a confession or
not, as relates distinctly to the fact thereby
discovered may be proved.
(2) Subsection (1) shall also apply mutates mutandis, in
the case of information received from a person
accused of any act made punishable under the Forest
Ordinance, or the Excise Ordinance, when such
person is in the custody of a forest officer or an excise
officer, respectively.
Meaning of terms 27A. In sections 25, 26 and 27, the terms 'forest officer' and
"forest officer" and 'excise officer' shall have the same meanings as are
"excise officer". respectively assigned to those terms in the Forest
Ordinance, and the Excise Ordinance.
Confession made 28.
If such a confession as is referred to in section 24 is made
after removal of
after the impression caused by any such inducement,
impression caused
threat, or promise has, in the opinion of the Court, been fully
by inducement,
removed, it is relevant.
threat, or promise,
relevant.
Confession 29. If such a confession is otherwise relevant, it does not become
otherwise relevant irrelevant merely because it was made under a promise of
not to become secrecy or in consequence of a deception practiced on the
irrelevant because accused person for the purpose of obtaining it, or when he
of promise of was drunk, or because it was made in answer to questions
secrecy, &c. which he need not have answered, whatever may have been
the form of those questions, or because he was not warned
that he was not bound to make such confession, and that
evidence of it might be given against him.
When more persons than one are being tried jointly for the
same offence, and a confession made by one of such persons
Confession made 30.
affecting himself and some other of such persons is
by one of several
proved, the court shall not take into consideration such
persons tried jointly
confession as against such other person.
for the same
offence. Explanation
- 'Offence' as used in this section includes the abetment of
or attempt to commit the offence.
Illustration
A and B are jointly tried for the murder of C. It is proved
that A said 'B and I murdered C'. The Court shall not
consider the effect of this confession as against B.
Admissions are not conclusive proof of the matters admitted,
Admission not 31. but they may operate as estoppels under the provisions
conclusive proof hereinafter contained.
but may stop.
STATEMENTS BY PERSONS WHO CANNOT BE CALLED AS
WITNESS
Cases in which 32. Statements, written or verbal, of relevant facts made by
statement of a person who is dead, or who cannot be found, or who has
relevant fact by become incapable of giving evidence, or whose
person who is dead attendance cannot be procured without an amount of
or cannot be found, delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the
&c. is relevant. case, appears to the Court unreasonable, are themselves
relevant facts in the following cases:-
(1) When the statement is made by a person as to the
When it
cause of his death, or as to any of the circumstances
relates to
of the transaction which resulted in his death, in
cause of
cases in which the cause of that person's death
death.
comes into question. Such statements are relevant
whether the person who made them was or was not,
at the time when they were made, under expectation
of death, and whatever may be the nature of the
proceedings in which the cause of his death comes
into question.
(2) When the statement was made by such person
Or is made
in the ordinary course of business, and in particular
in course of
when it consists of any entry or memorandum
business.
made by him in books kept in the ordinary course
of business or in the discharge of professional duty;
or of an acknowledgement written or signed by
him of the receipt of money, goods, securities, or
property of any kind; or of a document used in
commerce written or signed by him, or of the date
of a letter or other document usually dated, written,
or signed by him.
(3) When the statement is against the pecuniary or
Or against
proprietary interest of the person making it, or
interest of
when if true, it would expose him or would have
maker.
exposed him to a criminal prosecution or to a suit for
damages.
(4) When the statement gives the opinion of any
Or gives
such person as to the existence of any public right
opinion as
or custom or matter of public or general interest, of
to public
the existence of which, if it existed, he would have
right or
been likely to be aware, and when such statement
custom or
matters of was made before any controversy as to such right,
general custom, or matter had arisen.
interest.
Or relates to (5) When the statement relates to the existence of
existence of any relationship by bloods, marriage, or adoption
relationship. between persons as to whose relationship by blood,
marriage, adoption the person making the
statement had special means of knowledge, and
when the statement was made before the question
in dispute was raised.
Or is made (6) When the statement relates to the existence of
in will or any relationship by blood, marriage, or adoption
deed between persons deceased, and is made in any will
relating to or deed relating to the affairs of the family to
family which any such deceased person belonged, or in
affairs. any family pedigree, or upon any tombstone,
family portrait, or other thing in which such
statements are usually made, and when such
statement was made before the question in dispute
was raised.
Or in (7) When the statement is contained in any deed,
document will, or other instrument which relates to any such
relating to transaction as is mentioned in section 13,
transaction paragraph (a).
mentioned
in section
13 (a).
Or is made (8) When the statement was made by as number of
by several persons, and expressed feelings or impressions on
persons, their part relevant to the matter in question.
and
expresses
feelings
relevant to
matter in
question.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A was murdered by B, or
whether A died of injuries received in a transaction in the
course of which she was ravished. The question is, whether
she was ravished by B, or The question is, whether A was
killed by B under such circumstances that a suit would lie
against B by A's widow. Statements made by A as to the
cause of his death, referring respectively to the murder,
rape, and the actionable wrong under consideration, are
relevant facts.
(b) The questions is as to the date of A's birth. An entry in
the diary of a deceased surgeon, regularly kept in the
course of business, stating that on a given day, he attended
A's mother and delivered her of a son, is a relevant fact.
(c) The questions is, whether A was in Colombo on a given
day. A statement in the diary of a deceased proctor, regularly
kept in the course of business, that, on a given day, the
proctor attended A, at a place mentioned, in Colombo, for
the purpose of conferring with him upon specified business,
is a relevant fact.
(d) The questions is, whether a ship sailed from Galle
harbour on a given day. A letter written by a deceased
member of a merchant's firm by which she was chartered
to their correspondents in London to whom the cargo was
consigned, stating that the ship sailed on a given day from
Galle harbour, is a relevant fact.
(e) The question is, whether rent was paid to A for certain
land. A letter from A's deceased agent to B saying that he had
received the rent on A's account and held it at A's orders, is
a relevant fact.
(f) The question is, whether A and B were legally married.
The statement of a deceased clergyman that he married
them under such circumstances that the celebration would be
a crime is relevant.
(g) The question is, whether A, a person who cannot be
found, wrote a letter on a certain day. The fact that a letter
written by him is dated on that day is relevant.
(h) The question is, what was the cause of the wreck of a
ship. A protest made by the captain, whose attendance cannot
be procured, is a relevant fact.
(i) The question is, whether a given road is a public way. A
statement by A, a deceased headman of the village, that the
road was public, is a relevant fact.
(j) The question is, what was the price of grain on a certain
day in a particular market. A statement of the price made
by a deceased broker in the ordinary course of business is
a relevant fact.
(k) The question is, whether A, who is dead, was the father
of B. A statement by A that B was his son is a relevant fact.
(l) The question is, what was the date of the birth of A. A
letter from A's deceased father to a friend announcing the
birth of A on a given day is a relevant fact.
(m) The question is, whether, and when, A and B were
married. An entry in a memorandum book by C, the
deceased father of B, of his daughter's marriage with A on
a given date, is a relevant fact.
(n) A sues B for a libel expressed in a printed caricature
exposed in a shop window. The question is as to the
similarity of the caricature and its libelous character. The
remarks of a crowd of spectators on these points may be
proved.
Evidence in a 33. Evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding, or
former judicial before any person authorized by law to take it, is relevant,
proceeding when for the purpose of proving, in a subsequent judicial
relevant. proceeding, or in a later stage of the same judicial
proceeding, the truth of the facts which it states, when the
witness is dead or cannot be found, or is incapable of
giving evidence, or is kept out of the way by the adverse
party, or if his presence cannot be obtained without an
amount or delay or expense which, under the
circumstances of the case, the court considers
unreasonable:
Provided-
(a) that the proceeding was between the same
parties or their representatives in interest;
(b) that the adverse party in the first proceeding
had the right and opportunity to cross-examine;
(c) that the questions in issue were substantially
the same in the first as in the second proceeding.
Explanation
A criminal trial or inquiry shall be deemed to be a
proceeding between the prosecutor and the accused within
the meaning of this section.
STATEMENTS MADE UNDER SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES
Entries in books of 34. Entries in books of account, regularly kept in the course of
account when business, are relevant, whenever they refer to a matter into
relevant. which the Court has to inquire, but such statements shall
not alone be sufficient evidence to charge any person with
liability.
Illustration
A sues B for Rs: 1,000 and shows entries in his account
books showing B to be indebted to him to this amount.
The entries are relevant, but are not sufficient without
other evidence to prove the debt.
Entry in public 35. An entry in any public or other official book, register, or
record made in record, stating a fact in issue or relevant fact, and made by
performance of a public servant in the discharge of his official duty, or by
duty enjoined by any other person in performance of a duty especially
law ,whom enjoined by the law of the country in which such book,
relevant. register, or record is kept, is itself a relevant fact.
Statements 35A. A statement of a fact contained in a record, compiled -
contained in
(a) by any person in the course of any trade,
records compiled
business, or occupation in which he is engaged or
on information
employed or for the purposes of any paid or unpaid
supplied by third
office held by such person; and
parties having
(b) from information supplied to such person by any
personal
other person who had, or may reasonably supposed
knowledge of the
to have had, personal knowledge of the matters dealt
matters contained
with in that information,
in such statement,
when is a relevant fact:
relevant." [2, 33
Provided that such a statement shall not be capable
of 1998]
of corroborating the oral evidence of the person who
originally supplied the information from which the
record containing the statement was compiled.
Maps, charts and 36. Statements of facts in issue or relevant facts, made in
plans, when published maps or charts generally offered for public sale, or
relevant. in maps or plans made under the authority of Government
as to matters usually represented or stated in such maps,
charts, or plans, are themselves relevant facts.
Statement as to fact 37. When the Court has to form an opinion as to the existence of
of public nature any fact of a public nature, any statement of it made in a
contained in any recital contained in any enactment of Sri Lanka or in the
enactment or legislation of any foreign country or in any proclamation
notification when or notification of the Government of Sri Lanka, appearing in
relevant. the Government Gazette of Sri Lanka, or in any
[4, 6 of 2021] proclamation or notification of the Government of any
foreign country, appearing in any official publication of
the Government of such foreign country, is a relevant fact.
Statements in law 38. When the court has to form an opinion as to a law of the
books when country, any statement of such law contained in a book
relevant. purported to be printed or published under the authority of
the Government of such country, and to contain any such
law, and any record of a ruling of the courts of such
country contained in a book purporting to be a report of such
rulings, is relevant
Statement as to age 38A. (1) Where the court is required to form an opinion
in a certificate of a as to the age of a person, a statement in a certificate
Medical purporting to be issued by a Medical Practitioner as
Practitioner when to the probable age of such person is relevant.
relevant.
(2) In this section, 'Medical Practitioner' means a
[3, 32 of 1999]
Medical Practitioner registered under the Medical
Ordinance.
HOW MUCH OF A STATEMENT IS TO BE PROVED
What evidence to 39. When any statement of which evidence is given forms part
be given when of a longer statement, or of a conversation, or part of an
statement forms isolated document, or is contained in a document which
part of a forms part of a book, or of a connected series of letters or
conversation, papers, evidence shall be given of so much and no more of
document, book, or the statement, conversation, document, book, or series of
series of letters or letters or papers as the court considers necessary in that
papers. particular case to the full understanding of the nature and
effect of the statement and of the circumstances under which
it was made.
JUDGMENTS OF COURTS OF JUSTICE WHEN RELEVANT
Previous judgments4 0. The existence of any judgment, order, or decree which by
relevant to bar a law prevents any court from taking cognizance of a suit or
second suit or trial. holding as trial, is a relevant fact, when the question is,
whether such court ought to take cognizance of such suit
or to hold such trial.
Relevancy of
judgments in 41. (1) A final judgment, order, or decree at a competent
probate, &c., court, in the exercise of probate, matrimonial,
jurisdiction. admiralty, or insolvency jurisdiction, which confers
upon or takes away from any person any legal
character, or which declares any person to be entitled to
any such character, or to be entitled to any specific
thing, not as against any specified person, but
absolutely, is relevant, when the existence of any such
legal character, or the title of any such person to any
such thing, is relevant.
(2) Such judgment, or order, or decree is conclusive
proof-
(a) that any legal character which it confers
accrued at the time when such judgment, order,
or decree came into operation;
(b) that any legal character to which it declares
any such person to be entitled, accrued to that
person at the time when such judgment, order, or
decree declares it to have accrued to that person;
(c) that any legal character which it takes away
from any such person ceased at the time from
which such judgment, order, or decree declared
that it had ceased or should cease; and
(d) that anything to which it declares any person
to be so entitled was the property of that person
at the time from which such judgment, order, or
decree declares that it had been or should be his
property.
Relevancy of 41A. (1)Where in an action for defamation, the question
judgments &c., whether any person committed a criminal
recording offence is a fact in issue, a judgment of any court in
convictions, in Sri Lanka recording a conviction of that person for
civil proceedings. that criminal offence, being a judgment against
[3, 33 of 1998] which no appeal has been preferred within the
appealable period or which has been finally
affirmed on appeal, shall be relevant for the
purpose of proving that such person committed
such offence, and shall be conclusive proof of that
fact.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of
subsection (1), where in any civil proceedings,
the question whether any person, whether such
person is a party to such civil proceedings or not,
has been convicted of any offence by any court or
court martial in Sri Lanka, or has committed the
acts constituting an offence, is a fact in issue,
a judgment or order of such court or court martial
recording a conviction of such person for such
offence, being a judgment or order against
which no appeal has been preferred within the
appealable period, or which has been finally
affirmed in appeal, shall be relevant for the
purposes of proving that such person
committed such offence or committed the acts
constituting such offence.
(3) In this section -
'Court Martial' means a Court - Martial constituted
under the Army Act or the Navy Act or the Air Force
Act and the expression 'conviction' when used in
relation to a Court Martial, means a conviction by
such Court Martial confirmed in accordance with the
provisions of the law under which such Court
Martial was constituted.
Relevancy of 41B. (1) Where in any civil proceedings, the question
judgments &c., whether any person, whether such person is a party
recording findings to such civil proceeding or not, has committed
of adultery in Civil adultery is a fact in issue, any judgment, decree or
proceedings. order in any matrimonial proceedings recording a
[3, 33 of 1998] finding that such person has been found guilty of
adultery, being a decree, judgment or order from
which there has been no appeal within the
appealable period or which has been finally affirmed
in appeal, shall be relevant for the purpose of
proving that such person committed such adultery.
(2) In this section, 'matrimonial proceedings' means
an action for divorce a vinculo matrimonial or
separation a mensa et thoro or proceedings had before
a District Registrar pursuant to an application made to
such District Registrar under section 33 of the
Kandyan Marriage and Divorce Act or proceedings
had before a Quazi or Special Quazi pursuant to an
application for divorce made under the Muslim
Marriage and Divorce Act.
Illustrations
(a) B injures C while driving A's car in the course of B's
employment with A. B is convicted for careless
driving. In an action for damages instituted by C
against A and B, B's conviction is relevant.
(b) A obtains a decree for divorce against B on the
ground of B's adultery with C. C's wife sues C for
divorce on the ground of C's adultery with B. The
divorce decree is relevant to prove B's adultery
with C.
Relevancy of 41C. (1) Where in any civil proceedings, the question
whether any person, whether such person is a party
judgments &c.,
to such civil proceeding or not, is the father of a
recording findings
child is a fact in issue, an order entered in any
of paternity in
maintenance proceedings recording a finding that
Civil proceedings.
such person is the father of such child, being an
order from which there has been no appeal within
the appealable period or which has been finally
affirmed in appeal, shall be relevant for the purposes
of proving that such person is the father of such
child.
(2) In this section, 'maintenance proceedings' means
proceedings had before a Magistrate pursuant to an
application made to such Magistrate for an order
under section 2 of the Maintenance Ordinance or
proceedings had before a Quazi pursuant to a claim
made to such Quazi by, or on behalf of, a child,
under the Muslim Marriage and Divorce Act.
When judgments, 42. Judgments, orders, or decrees other than those mentioned
&c., other than in sections 41, 41A, 41B, and 41C are relevant if they
those mentioned in relate to matters of a public nature relevant to the inquiry;
sections 41, 41A, but such judgments, orders, or decrees are not conclusive
41B, and 41C are proof of that which they state.
relevant.
Illustrations
[4, 33 of 1998]
A sues B for trespass on his land. B alleges the existence
of a public right of way over the land, which A denies. The
existence of a decree in favor of the defendant in a suit by
A against C for a trespass on the same land, in which C
alleged the existence of the same right of way, is relevant,
but it is not conclusive proof that the right of way exists.
When judgments, 43. Judgments, orders, or decrees, other than those mentioned in
&c., other than sections 40, 41, 41A, 41B, 41C and 42, are relevant, unless
those mentioned in the existence of such judgment, order, or decree is a fact in
sections 40, 41, issue, or is relevant under some other provision of this
41A, 41B, 41C and Ordinance.
42 are relevant.
[5, 33 of 1998]
Illustrations
(a) A and B separately sue C for a libel which reflects
upon each of them. C in each case says that the
matters alleged to be libelous is true, and the
circumstances are such that it is probably true in each
case, or in neither. A obtains a decree against C for
damages, on the ground that C failed to make out his
justification. The fact is irrelevant as between B and
C.
(b) A prosecutes B for stealing a cow from him. B is
convicted. A afterwards sues C for the cow, which B
had sold to him before his conviction. As between A
and C the judgment against B is irrelevant.
(c) A has obtained a decree for the possession of land
against B; C, B's son, murders A in consequence. The
existence of the judgment is relevant, as showing
motive for a crime.
(d) A is charged with theft and with having been
previously convicted of theft. The previous
conviction is relevant as a fact in issue.
(e) A is tried for the murder of B. The fact that B
prosecuted A for libel, and that A was convicted and
sentenced, is relevant under section 8, as showing the
motive for the fact in issue.
Fraud, collusion, or 44. Any party to a suit or other proceeding may show that any
incompetence of judgment, order, or decree which is relevant under
court may be sections 40, 41, 41A, 41B, 41C or 42 and which has been
proved. proved by the adverse party, was delivered by a court not
[6, 33 of 1998] competent to deliver it, or was obtained by fraud or
collusion.
OPINIONS THIRD PERSONS WHEN RELEVANT
Opinions of 45. When the Court has to form an opinion as to foreign law,
experts. or of science, or art, or as to identity or genuineness of
[2, 1 of 1946] handwriting or finger impressions, palm impressions or
foot impressions, the opinions upon that point of persons
specially skilled in such foreign law, science, or art, or in
questions as to identity or genuineness of handwriting or
finger impressions, palm impressions or foot impressions,
are relevant.
Such persons are called experts.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether the death of A was caused by
poison. The opinions of experts as to the symptoms
produced for the poison by which A is supposed to have died
are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A, at the time of doing a
certain act, was, by reason of unsoundness of mind,
incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he was
doing what was either wrong or contrary to law. The
opinions of experts upon the question whether the symptoms
exhibited by A commonly show unsoundness of mind, and
whether such unsoundness of mind usually renders persons
incapable of knowing the nature of the acts which they
do, or of knowing what they do is either wrong or contrary
to law, are relevant.
(c) The question is, whether a certain document was written
by A. Another document is produced which is proved or
admitted to have been written by A. The opinion of experts
on the question whether the two documents were written
by the same person or by different persons, are relevant.
Facts bearing upon 46. Facts not otherwise relevant are relevant if they support or
opinions of are inconsistent with the opinions of experts, when such
experts. opinions are relevant.
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A was poisoned by a
certain poison. The fact that other persons who were
poisoned by that poison exhibited certain symptoms
which experts affirm or deny to be the symptoms of
that poison, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether an obstruction to a
harbour is caused by a certain sea-wall. The fact that
other harbours are similarly situated in other respects
but, where there were no such sea-walls, began to be
obstructed at about the same time, is relevant.
Opinion as to 47. When the Court has to form an opinion as to the persons
handwriting. by whom any document was written or signed, the opinion
of any person acquainted with the handwriting of the
person by whom it is supposed to be written or signed that
it was or was not written or signed by that person is a
relevant fact.
Explanation
A person is said to be acquainted with the handwriting of
another person when he has seen that person write, or
when he has received documents purporting to be written
by that person in answer to documents written by himself
or under his authority and addressed to that person, or
when, in the ordinary course of business, documents
purporting to be written by that person have been
habitually submitted to him.
Illustrations
The question is, whether a given letter is in the
handwriting of A, a merchant in London.
B is a merchant in Colombo, who had written letters
addressed to A and received letters purporting to be written
by him.
C is B's clerk, whose duty it was to examine and file B's
correspondence. D is B's broker, to whom B habitually
submitted the letters purporting to be written by A for the
purpose of advising with him thereon.
The opinion B, C, and D on the question, whether the
letter is in the handwriting of A, are relevant, though
neither B, C, nor D ever saw A write.
Opinion as to 48. When the Court has to form an opinion as to the existence
usages, tenants, of any general custom or right, the opinion, as to the
&c. when relevant. existence of such custom or right, of persons who would be
likely to know of its existence if it existed, are relevant.
Explanation
- The expression 'general custom or right' include customs
or rights common to any considerable class of persons.
Illustrations
The right of the inhabitants of a particular village to use the
water of a particular well is a general right within the
meaning of this section.
Opinion as to 49. When the Court has to form an opinion as to-
usage, tenets &c.
(a) the usage and tenets of any body of men or
when relevant
family;
(b) the constitution and government of any religious or
charitable foundation; or
(c) the meaning of words or terms used in particular
districts or by particular classes of people;
Opinion on 50. When the Court has to form an opinion as to the
relationship, when relationship of one person to another, the opinion,
relevant. expressed by conduct, as the existence of such relationship
of any person who, as a member of the family or
otherwise, has special means of knowledge on the subject,
is a relevant fact:
Illustrations
(a) The question is, whether A and B were married. The
fact that they were usually received and treated by
their friends as husband and wife is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A was the legitimate son of
B. The fact that A was always treated as such by
members of the family is relevant.
Grounds of 51. Whenever the opinion of any living Person is relevant the
opinion, when grounds on which such opinion is based are relevant.
relevant.
Illustrations
An expert may give an account of experiments performed
by him for the purpose of forming his opinion.
CHARACTER WHEN RELEVANT
In civil cases 52. In civil cases, the fact that the character of any person
character to prove concerned is such as to render probable or improbable any
conduct imputed, conduct imputed to him is irrelevant, except in so far as
irrelevant. such character appears from facts otherwise relevant.
In criminal cases 53.
In criminal proceedings the fact that the person accused is
previous good
of a good character is relevant.
character relevant.
Previous bad 54. In criminal proceedings the fact that the person accused is
character of a bad character is irrelevant, unless evidence has been
irrelevant, except given that he has a good character, in which case it
when evidence of becomes relevant.
good character is
given.
Explanation 1
- This section does not apply to cases in which the bad
character of any person is itself a fact in issue.
Explanation 2
- A previous conviction is relevant as evidence of bad
character in such case.
Character as 55. In civil cases, the fact that the character of any person is such
affecting damages. as to affect the amount of damages which he ought to receive
is relevant.
Explanation
In section 52, 53, 54 and 55 the word 'character' includes
both reputation and disposition: but, except as provided in
section 54, evidence may be given only of general reputation
and general disposition, and not of particular acts by
which reputation or disposition were shown.
PART II ON
PROOF
CHAPTER III
FACTS WHICH NEED NOT BE PROVED
No proof required 56. No fact of which the Court will take judicial notice need
of fact judicially not be proved.
noticed.
The Court shall take judicial notice of the following facts:
Facts of which 57.
Court must take (1) all laws, or rules having the force of law, now or
judicial notice. heretofore in force or hereafter to be in force in any
[5, 6 of 2021] part of Sri Lanka;
[7, 3 of 1961]
(2) all public Acts passed or hereafter to be passed by
Parliament, and all local and personal Acts directed
by Parliament to be judicially noticed;
(3) articles of war for the Sri Lanka Army, Navy or
Air force;
(4) the course of proceedings of the Legislature of Sri
Lanka:
(5) the Public Seal of the Republic of Sri Lanka;
(6) the seals of all the courts of Sri Lanka and of
notaries public; and all seals which any person is
authorized to use by any enactment for the time being
in force of the Legislature of Sri Lanka or of the
Legislature of any foreign Country.
(7) The accession to office, names, titles, functions,
and signatures of the persons filling for the time
being any public office in any part of Sri Lanka, If the
fact of their appointment to such office is notified in the
Gazette;
(8) The existence, title and national flag of every
State or Sovereign recognized by the Republic of Sri
Lanka;
(9) The ordinary course of nature, natural and
artificial divisions of time, the geographical divisions
of the world, the meaning of English words, and
public festivals, facts, and holidays notified in the
Gazette;
(10) the territorial limits of the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka and of its divisions;
(11) The commencement, continuance, and
termination of hostilities between the Republic of Sri
Lanka and any foreign State or body of persons;
(12) The names of the members and officers of the
court, and of their deputies and subordinate officers and
assistants, and also of all officers acting in execution of
its process, and of all attorneys-at-law, and other
persons authorized by law to appear or act before it;
(13) The rule of the road on land or at sea;
(14) All other matters which it is directed by any
enactment to notice.
Facts admitted 58. No fact need be proved in any proceeding which the
need not be parties thereto or their agents agree to admit at the hearing,
proved. or which, before the hearing, they agree to admit by any
writing under their hands, or which by any rule of pleading
in force at the time they are deemed to have admitted by
their pleadings:
Provided that the court may, in its discretion, require the
facts admitted to be proved otherwise than by such
admissions.
CHAPTER IV
OF ORAL EVIDENCE
Facts may be 59. All facts, except the contents of documents, may be
proved by oral proved by oral evidence.
evidence.
Oral evidence must 60. Oral evidence must, in all cases whatever, be direct; that is
be direct. to say-
(i) If it refers to a fact which could be seen it must be
the evidence of a witness who says he saw that fact;
(ii) If it refers to a fact which could be heard, it must be
the evidence of a witness who says he heard that fact;
(iii) If it refers to a fact which could be perceived by
any other sense or in any other manner, it must be the
evidence of a witness who says he perceived that fact
by that sense or in that manner;
(iv) If it refers to an opinion or to the grounds on
which that opinion is held, it must be the evidence of
the person who holds that opinion on those grounds.
Provided that the opinions of experts expressed in any
treatise commonly offered for sale, and the grounds on
which such opinions are held, may be proved by the
production of such treatises if the author is dead or cannot
be found, or has become incapable of giving evidence, or
cannot be called as a witness without an amount of delay
or expense which the Court regards as unreasonable.
Provided also that, if oral evidence refers to the existence
or conditions of any material thing other than a document,
the court may, if it thinks fit, require the production of
such material thing for its inspection.
CHAPTER V
OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
Proof of contents 61. The contents of documents may be proved either by
of documents. primary or by secondary evidence.
Primary evidence. 62. Primary evidence means the document itself produced for
the inspection of the court.
Explanation 1
- Where a document is executed in several parts, each
part is primary evidence of the document.
Where a document is executed in counterpart, such
counterpart being executed by one or some of the
parties only, each counterpart is primary evidence as
against the parties executing it.
Explanation 2
- Where a number of documents are all made by one
uniform process, as in the case of printing, lithography,
or photography, each is primary evidence of the
contents of the rest; but where they are all copies of a
common original, they are not primary evidence of the
contents of the original.
Illustrations
A person is shown to have been in possession of a
number of placards, all printed at one time from one
original. Any one of the placards is primary evidence of
the contents of any other but no one of them is primary
evidence of the contents of the original.
Secondary 63. Secondary evidence means and includes -
evidence.
(1) certified copies given under the provisions
hereinafter contained;
(2) copies made from the original by mechanical
process which in themselves insure the accuracy of
the copy, and copies compared with such copies;
(3) copies made from a compared with the original;
(4) counterparts of documents as against the parties
who did not execute them;
(5) oral accounts of the contents of a document given
by some person who has himself seen it.
Illustrations
(a) photograph of an original is secondary evidence of its
contents, though the two have not been compared, if it is
proved that the thing photographed was the original.
(b) A copy compared with a copy of a letter made by a
copying machine is secondary evidence of the contents of
the letter, if it is shown that the copy made by the copying
machine was made from the original.
(c) A copy transcribed from a copy, but afterwards
compared with the original, is secondary evidence; but the
copy not so compared is not secondary evidence of the
original, although the copy from which it was transcribed
was compared with the original.
(d) Neither an oral account of a copy compared with the
original nor an oral account of a photograph or machine-
copy of the original, is secondary evidence of the original.
Proof of 64.
Documents must be proved by primary evidence, except in
documents by
the cases hereinafter mentioned.
primary evidence.
Cases in which 65. Secondary evidence may be given of the existence,
secondary evidence condition, or contents of a document in the following
relating to cases:-
documents may be (1)when the original is shown or appears to be in the
given. possession or power-
[6, 6 of 2021]
(i) of the person against whom the document is
sought to be proved, or
(ii) of any person out of reach of, or not subject
to, the process of the court, or
(iii) of any person legally bound to produce it,
and when, after the notice mentioned in section
66, such person does not produce it;
(2) when the existence, condition, or contents of the
original have been proved to be admitted in
writing by the person against whom it is sought to be
proved, or his representative in interest;
(3) when the original has been destroyed or lost, or
when the party offering evidence of its contents
cannot, for any other reason not arising from his own
default or neglect, produce it in reasonable time;
(4) when the original is of such a nature as not to be
easily movable;
(5) when the original is a public document within the
meaning of section 74;
(6) when the original is a document of which a
certified copy is permitted by this Ordinance or by
any other law in force in Sri Lanka to be given in
evidence;
(7) when the originals consist of numerous accounts or
other documents which cannot conveniently be
examined in court, and the fact to be proved is the
general result of the whole collection.
Rules as to notice 66. Secondary evidence of the contents of the documents
to produce. referred to in section 65, subsection (1), shall not be given
unless that party proposing to give such secondary
evidence has previously given to the party in whose
possession or power the document is, or to his proctor,
such notice to produce it as is prescribed by law; and if no
notice is prescribed by law, then such notice as the court
considers reasonable under the circumstances of the case.
Provided that such notice shall not be required in order to
render secondary evidence admissible in any of the
following cases, or in any other case in which the court
thinks fit to dispense with it:-
(1) when the document to be proved is itself a notice;
(2) when from the nature of the case, the adverse
party must know that he will be required to produce
it;
(3) when it appears or is proved that the adverse party
has obtained possession of the original by fraud or by
force;
(4) when the adverse party or his agent has the original
in court;
(5) when the adverse party or his agent has admitted
the loss of the document;
(6) when the person in possession of the document is
out of reach of, or not subject to, the process in the
court.
Proof of signature 67. If a document is alleged to be signed or to have been
and handwriting of written wholly or in part by any person, the signature or
person alleged to the handwriting of so much of the document as is alleged
have signed or to be in that person's handwriting must be proved to be in
written document his handwriting.
produced.
If a document is required by law to be attested, it shall not
Proof of execution 68.
be used as evidence until one attesting witness at least has
of document
been called for the purpose of proving its execution, if
required by law to
there be an attesting witness alive, and subject to the
be attested
process of the court and capable of giving evidence.
If no such attesting witness can be found, or if the
Proof where no 69.
document purports to have been executed in any foreign
attesting witness
Country, it must be proved that the attestation of one
found.
attesting witness at least is in his handwriting, and that the
[7, 6 of 2021]
signature of the person executing the document is in the
handwriting of that person.
Admission of 70. The admission of a party to an attested document of its
execution by party execution by himself shall be sufficient proof of its execution
to attested as against him, though it be a document required by law to
document. be attested.
Proof when 71.
If the attesting witness denies or does not recollect the
attesting witness
execution of the document, its execution may be proved
denies the
by other evidence.
execution.
Proof of document 72. An attested document not required by law to be attested
not required by law may be proved as if it was unattested.
to be attested.
Comparison of 73. (1) In order to ascertain whether a signature writing
handwritings. or seal is that of the person by whom it purports to have
[3, 1 of 1946] been written or made, any signature, writing, or seal
admitted or proved to the satisfaction of the Court to
have been written or made by that person may be
compared with the one which is to be proved, although
that signature, writing, or seal has not been produced or
proved for any other purpose.
(2) The Court may direct any person present in Court
to write any words or figures for the purpose of
enabling the Court to compare the words or figures so
written with any words or figures alleged to have
been written by such person.
(3) This section applies also, with any necessary
modification, to finger impressions, palm impressions
and foot impressions.
PUBLIC DOCUMENTS
Public documents. 74. The following documents are public documents:-
[8, 6 of 2021]
(a) documents forming the acts, or records of the
acts-
(i) of the Sovereign authority;
(ii) of official bodies and tribunals; and
(iii) of public officers, legislative, judicial, and
executive, whether of Sri Lanka or of a foreign
country.
(b) public records, kept in Sri Lanka, of private
documents;
(c) plans, surveys, or maps purporting to be signed
by the Surveyor-General or officer acting on his behalf.
Private documents. 75. All other documents are private.
Certified copies of 76. Every public officer having the custody of a public
public documents. document, which any person has a right to inspect, shall
give that person on demand a copy of it on payment of the
legal fees therefore, together with a certificate written at
the foot of such copy that it is a true copy of such
document or part thereof, as the case may be, and such
certificate shall be dated and subscribed by such officer
with his name and his official title, and shall be sealed,
whenever such officer is authorized by law to make use of
a seal, and such copies so certified shall be called certified
copies.
Explanation
- Any officer who, by the ordinary course of official duty,
is authorized to deliver such copies shall be deemed to
have the custody of such documents within the meaning of
this section.
Proof of 77. Such certified copies may be produced in proof of the
documents by contents of the public documents or parts of the public
production of documents of which they purport to be copies.
certified copies.
The following public documents may be proved as
Proof of other 78.
follows:
official documents.
[9, 6 of 2021] (1) acts, orders, or notifications of the Government of Sri
Lanka or of any of its departments-
(i) by the records of the departments certified by the
heads of those departments respectively, or by the
Permanent Secretary or a Deputy or an Assistant
Permanent secretary;
(ii) by any document purporting to be printed by
order of the Government;
(2) the proceedings of the Legislature-
(i) by the minutes of that body, or
(ii) by published enactments or abstracts, or
(iii) by copies purporting to be printed by order of
Government;
(3) proclamations, orders, or regulations issued by the
President or any Minister or any department of Government-
by copies or extracts contained in the Gazette of Sri Lanka;
(4) the acts of the executive or the proceedings of the
legislature of a foreign country-
(i) by journals published by their authority, or
commonly received in that country as such, or
(ii) by a copy certified under the seal of the country or
Sovereign, or
(iii) by a recognition thereof in some public
enactment of Sri Lanka;
(5) the proceedings of a Municipal body in Sri Lanka-
(i) by a copy of such proceedings certified by the
legal keeper thereof, or
(ii) by a printed book purporting to be published by
the authority of such body;
(6) public documents of any other class in a foreign
country-
(i) by the original, or
(ii) by a copy certified by the legal keeper thereof, with
a certificate under the seal of a notary public or of
any Ambassador, High Commissioner, or other
diplomatic agent of Sri Lanka, that the copy is duly
certified by the officer having the legal custody of the
original and upon proof of the character of the
document according to the law of the foreign country.
PRESUMPTION AS TO DOCUMENTS
Presumption as to 79. (1) The Court shall presume every document
genuineness of purporting to be a certificate, certified copy, or other
certified copies. document, which is by law declared to be admissible
[10, 6 of 2021] as evidence of any particular fact, and which purports to
be duly certified by any officer in Sri Lanka to be
genuine:
Provided that such document is substantially in the
form and purports to be executed in the manner directed
by law in that behalf.
(2) The Court shall also presume that any officer, by
whom any such document purports to be signed or
certified, held, when he signed it, the official character
which he claims in such paper.
Presumption on 80. Whenever any document is produced before any court
production of purporting to be a record or memorandum of the evidence
record of evidence. or of any part of the evidence given by a witness in a judicial
proceeding or before any officer authorized by law to take
such evidence, or to be a statement or confession by any
prisoner or accused person taken in accordance with law
and purporting to be signed by any Judge or Magistrate or by
any such officer as aforesaid, the court shall presume-
(i) that the document is genuine;
(ii) that any statements, as to the circumstances under
which it was taken, purporting to be made by the
persons signing it, are true; and
(iii) that such evidence, statement, or confession was
duly taken.
The Court shall presume the genuineness of every document
Presumption as to 81. purporting to be the Gazette of Ceylon or Sri Lanka, and of
Gazettes. every document purporting to be a document directed by
[11, 6 of 2021] any law to be kept by any person, if such document is kept
substantially in the form required by law and is produced
from proper custody.
Repealed 82. Repealed Section.
[12, 6 of 2021]
Presumption as to 83. The Court shall presume that maps, plans, or surveys
maps or plan made purporting to be signed by the Surveyor-General or officer
or signed by acting on his behalf were duly made by his authority and
Surveyor-General. are accurate; but maps, plans, or surveys not so signed
must be proved to be accurate.
Presumption as to 84. The Court shall presume the genuineness of every book
collections of laws purporting to be printed or published under the authority of
and reports of the Government of any country, and to contain any of the
decisions. laws of that country, and of every book purporting to contain
reports of decisions of the Courts of such country.
Presumption as to 85. The court shall presume that every document purporting to
powers of attorney. be a power of attorney, and to have been executed before,
[13, 6 of 2021] and authenticated by, a notary public, a person duly
authorized by law in that behalf, or any court, Judge,
Magistrate, an Ambassador or High Commissioner or other
diplomatic representative of Sri Lanka, was so executed
and authenticated.
Presumption as to 86. The court may presume that any document purporting to
certified copies of be a certified copy of any judicial record of any country
foreign judicial other than the Republic of Sri Lanka is genuine and accurate,
records. if the document purports to be certified in any manner which
is certified by any representative of the Republic of Sri
[14, 6 of 2021]
Lanka, in or for such country to be the manner commonly in
use in that country for the certification of copies of judicial
records.
The court may presume that any book to which it may
Presumption as to 87.
refer for information on matters of public or general interest,
books and maps.
and that any published map or chart, the statements of
which are relevant facts, and which is produced for its
inspection, was written and published by the person, and at
the time and place by whom or at which it purports to have
been written or published.
The court may presume that a message, forwarded from a
Presumptions as to 88.
telegraphic telegraph office to the person to whom such message purports
messages. to be addressed, corresponds with a message delivered for
transmission at the office from which the message purports to
be sent; but the court shall not make any presumption as to
the person by whom such message was delivered for
transmission.
Presumption as to 89. The court shall presume that every document called for and
due execution, &c. not produced, after notice to produce given under section
of documents not 66, was attested, stamped, and executed in the manner
produced required by law.
Presumption as to 90. Where any document purporting or proved to be thirty
documents thirty years old is produced from any custody which the court in
years old. the particular case considers proper, the court may presume
that the signature and every other part of such document
which purports to be in the handwriting of any particular
person is in that person's handwriting and in the case of a
document executed or attested, that it was duly executed
and attested by the persons by whom it purports to be
executed and attested.
Explanation
Documents are said to be in proper custody if they are
in the place in which, and under the care of the person
with whom they would naturally be; but no custody is
improper if it is proved to have had a legitimate
origin, or if the circumstances of the particular case
are such as to render such an origin probable.
This explanation applies also to section 81.
Illustrations
(a) A has been in possession of landed property for a
long time. He produces from his custody deeds
relating to the land showing his title to it. The custody
is proper.
(b) A produces deeds relating to landed property of
which he is the mortgagee. The mortgagor is in
possession. The custody is proper.
(c) A, a connection of B, produces deeds relating to
lands in B's possession, which were deposited with
him by B for safe custody. The custody is proper.
CHAPTER VI
BANKERS’ BOOKS
Interpretation. 90A. In this Chapter, unless there is something repugnant in
[15, 6 of 2021] the subject or context -
[2, 29 of 2005]
'bank' and 'banker' mean -
(i) any company carrying on the business of
bankers,
(ii) any partnership or individual to whose
books the provisions of this Chapter shall
have been extended as hereinafter provided,
(iii) any savings bank, post office savings
bank, or money order office;
'bankers’ books' include ledgers, day books, cash
books, account books, and all other books used in the
ordinary business of a bank and includes data stored
by electronic, magnetic, optical or other means in an
information system in the ordinary course of
business of a bank;
'certified copy' means a copy of any entry in the
books of a bank, together with a certificate written at
the foot of such copy that it is a true copy of
such entry; that such entry is contained in one of
the ordinary books of the bank, and was made in
the usual and ordinary course of business; and that
such book is still in the custody of the bank, such
certificate being dated and subscribed by the
principal accountant or manager of the bank with
his name and official title and where the bankers'
books consist of data stored by electronic,
magnetic, optical or other means in an information
system, includes a printout of such data together with
an affidavit made in accordance with section 6 of the
Evidence (Special Provisions) Act, No. 14 of
1995, or such other document of certification as may
be prescribed in terms of any law for the time being
in force relating to the tendering of computer
evidence before any court or tribunal.
'company' shall have the same meaning assigned to it
under the Companies Act, No. 7 of 2007.
Power to extend 90B. The Minister may from time to time, by notification in
provisions of the Gazette, extend the provisions of this Chapter to the
chapter. books of any partnership or individual carrying on the
[16, 6 of 2021] business of bankers within Sri Lanka, and keeping a set
of not less than three ordinary account books, namely, a
cash book, a day book or journal, and a ledger, and may
in like manner rescind any such notification.
Mode of proof of 90C. Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, a certified copy of
entries in bankers’ any entry in a banker's book shall in all legal proceedings
books. be received as prima facie evidence of the existence of such
entry, and shall be admitted as evidence of the matters,
transactions, and accounts therein recorded in every case
where, and to the same extent as the original entry itself is
now by law admissible, but not further or otherwise.
No officer of a bank shall, in any legal proceeding to which
Inspection of 90D. the bank is not a party, be compellable to produce any
books by order of banker's book the contents of which can be proved under
court or Judge. this Chapter, or to appear as a witness to prove the matters,
transactions, and accounts therein recorded, unless by
order of the court, or a Judge, made for special cause.
(1) On the application of any party to a legal
proceeding, the court or a Judge may order that such
party be at liberty to inspect and take copies of any
Case in which 90E.
entries in a banker's book for any of the purposes of
officer of bank not
such proceeding, or may order the bank to prepare and
compellable to
produce, within a time to be specified in the order,
produce books.
certified copies of all such entries, accompanied by a
further certificate that no other entries are to be
found in the books of the bank
relevant to the matters in issue in such proceeding,
and such further certificate shall be dated and
subscribed in manner herein before directed in
reference to certified copies.
(2) An order under this or the preceding section may
be made either with or without summoning the
bank, and shall be served on the bank three clear
days (exclusive of bank holidays) before the same is
to be obeyed, unless the court or Judge shall otherwise
direct.
(3) The bank may at any time, before the time limited
for obedience to any such order as aforesaid, either
offer to produce their books at the trial or give notice
of their intention to show cause against such order,
and thereupon the same shall not be enforced without
further order.
Costs. 90F. (1) The costs of any application to the court or a
Judge under or for the purposes of this Chapter, and
the costs of anything done or to be done under an
order of the court or a Judge made under or for the
purposes of this Chapter, shall be in the discretion of
the court or Judge, who may further order such costs
or any part thereof to be paid to any party by the
bank if they have been incurred in consequence of
any fault or improper delay on the part of the bank.
(2) Any order made under this section for the
payment of costs to or by a bank may be enforced
as if the bank were a party to the proceeding.
(3) Any order under this section awarding costs may,
on application to any court of civil judicature
designated in the order, be executed by such court as
if the order were a decree of money passed by itself;
CHAPTER VII
OF THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL BY DOCUMENTARY
EVIDENCE
Evidence of terms 91. When the terms of a contract, or of a grant, or of any other
of contracts, grants disposition of property have been reduced by or by
or other disposition consent of the parties to the form of a document, and in all
of property cases in which any matter is required by law to be reduced to
reduced to form of the form of a document, no evidence shall be given in proof
document. of the terms of such contract. Grant, or other disposition of
[17, 6 of 2021] property, or of such matter, except the document itself, or
secondary evidence of its contents in cases in which
secondary evidence is admissible under the provisions
herein before contained.
Exception 1
When a public officer is required by law to be
appointed in writing, and when it is shown that any
particular person has acted as such officer, the writing
by which he is appointed need not be proved.
Exception 2
Wills admitted to probate in Sri Lanka may be proved
by the probate.
Explanation 1
this section applies equally to cases in which the
contracts, grants, or dispositions of property referred
to are contained in one document, and to cases in which
they are contained in more documents than one.
Explanation 2
Where there are more originals than one, one original
only need be proved. Explanation
Explanation 3
The statement in any document whatever of a fact other
than the facts referred to in this section shall not
preclude the admission of oral evidence as to the
same fact.
Illustrations
(a) If a contract be contained in several letters, all the
letters in which it is contained must be proved.
(b) If the contract is contained in a bill of exchange, the
bill of exchange must be proved.
(c) If a bill of exchange is drawn in a set of three, one
only need be proved.
(d) A contracts in writing with B for the delivery of
plumbago upon certain terms. The contract mentions
the fact that B had paid A the price of her plumbago
contracted for verbally on another occasion. Oral
evidence is offered that no payment was made for the
other plumbago. The evidence is admissible.
(e) A gives B a receipt for money paid by B. Oral
evidence is offered of the payment. The evidence is
admissible.
Exclusion of 92. When the terms of any such contract, grant, or other
evidence of oral disposition of property, or any matter required by law to be
agreement. reduced to the form of a document, have been proved
according to the last section, no evidence of any oral
agreement or statement shall be admitted as between the
parties to any such instrument, or their representatives in
interest, for the purpose of contradicting, varying, adding
to, or subtracting from its terms.
Proviso (1) - Any fact may be proved which would
invalidate any document, or which would entitle any
person to any decree or order relating thereto, such as
fraud, intimidation, illegality, want of due execution,
want of capacity in any, contracting party, the fact that
it is wrongly dated, want or failure of consideration,
or mistake in fact of law.
Proviso (2) - The existence of any separate oral
agreement as to any matter on which a document is
silent, and which is not inconsistent with its terms,
may be proved. In considering whether or not this
proviso applies, the court shall have regard to the
degree of formality of the document.
Proviso (3) - The existence of any separate oral
agreement constituting a condition precedent to the
attaching of any obligation under any such contract,
grant, or disposition of property may be proved.
Proviso (4) - The existence of any distinct subsequent
oral agreement to rescind or modify any such
contract, grant, or disposition of property may be
proved, except in cases in which such contract, grant,.
Or disposition of property is by law required to be in
writing, or has been registered according to the law in
force for the time being as to the registration of
documents.
Proviso (5) - Any usage or custom by which
incidents, not expressly mentioned in any contract,
are usually annexed to contracts of that description,
may be proved. Provided that the annexing of such
incident would not be repugnant to, or inconsistent
with, the express terms of the contract.
Proviso (6) - Any fact may be proved which shows in
what manner the language of a document is related to
existing facts.
Illustrations
(a) A policy of insurance is effected on goods 'in
ships from Colombo to London'. The goods are
shipped in a particular ship which is lost. The
fact that that particular ship was orally excepted
from the policy cannot be proved.
(b) A agrees absolutely in writing to pay B Rs.
1,000 on the 1st of March, 1896. The fact that, at
the same time, an oral agreement was made that
money should not be paid till the 31st of March
cannot be proved.
(c) An estate called the 'Rampore estate' is sold
by a deed which contains a map of the property
sold. The fact that land not included in the map
had always been regarded as part of the estate
and was meant to pass by the deed cannot be
proved.
(d) A enters into a written contract with B to work
certain mines, the property of B, upon
certain terms. A was induced to do so by a
misrepresentation of B' as to their value. This
fact may be proved.
(e) A institutes a suit against B for the specific
performance of a contract, and also prays that the
contract may be reformed as to one of its
provisions, on the ground that the provision was
inserted in it by mistake. A may prove that such a
mistake was made as would by law entitle him to
have the contract reformed.
(f) A orders goods of B by a letter, in which
nothing is said as to the time of payment, and
accepts the goods on delivery. B sues A for the
price. A may show that the goods were supplied on
credit for a term still unexpired.
(g) A sells B a horse a verbally warrants him
sound. A gives B a paper in these words: 'Bought
of A horse for 500'. B may prove the verbal
warranty.
(h) A hires lodgings of B, and gives B a card on
which is written 'Rooms Rs. 200 a month'. A may
prove a verbal agreement that these terms were
to include partial board. A hires lodgings of B for a
year, and a regularly stamped agreement 'drawn up
by a notary is made between them. It is silent on
the subject of board. A may not prove that board
was included in the terms verbally.
(i)A applies to B for a debt due to A by sending a
receipt for the money. B keeps the receipt and does
not send the money. In a suit for the amount A may
prove this.
(j) A and B made a contract in writing to take
effect upon the happening of a certain contingency.
The writing is left with B, who sues A upon it. A
may show the circumstances under which it was
delivered.
Exclusion of 93. When the language used in a document is on its face
evidence to explain ambiguous or defective, evidence may not be given of
or amend facts which would show its meaning or supply its defects.
ambiguous
Illustrations
document.
(a) A agrees in writing to sell a horse to B for 'Rs.
1,000 or Rs. 1,500'. Evidence cannot be given to show
which price was to be given.
(b) A deed contains blanks. Evidence cannot be given
of facts which would show how they were meant to
be filled.
Exclusion of 94. When language used in a document is plain in itself, and
evidence against when it applies accurately to existing facts, evidence may not
application of be given to show that it was not meant to apply to such facts.
document to
Illustrations
existing facts.
A sells to B by deed 'My estate at Negombo containing 100
acres'. A has an estate at Negombo containing 100 acres.
Evidence may not be given of the fact that the estate meant
was one situated at a different place and of a different size.
When language used in a document is plain in itself, but is
Evidence as to 95. unmeaning in reference to existing facts, evidence may be
document given to show that it was used in a particular sense.
unmeaning in
Illustrations
reference to
A sells to B by deed 'My house in Colombo'. A had no house
existing facts.
in Colombo, but it appears that he had a house at Kotte of
which B had been in possession since the execution of the
deed. These facts may be proved to show that the deed
related to the house at Kotte.
When the facts are such that the language used might have
Evidence as to 96. been meant to apply to any one, and could not have been
application of meant to apply to more than one of several persons or things,
language which evidence may be given of facts which show which of those
can apply to one persons or things it was intended to apply to.
only of several
Illustrations
persons.
(a) A agrees to sell to B for Rs. 1,000 'My white horse', A
has two white horses. Evidence may be given of facts
which show which of them was meant.
(b) A agrees to accompany B to Halifax. Evidence may be
given of facts showing whether Halifax in Yorkshire or
Halifax in Nova Scotia was meant.
Evidence as to 97. When the language used applies partly to one set of
application of existing facts and partly to another set of existing facts, but
language to one of the whole of it does not apply correctly to either, evidence
two sets of facts, to may be given to show to which of the two it was meant to
neither of which apply.
the whole correctly
Illustration
applies.
A agrees to sell to B 'My land at X in the occupation of Y'. A
has land at X, but not in the occupation of Y, and he has land
in the occupation of Y, but it is not at X. Evidence may
be given of facts showing which he meant to sell.
Evidence as to 98. Evidence may be given to show the meaning of illegible or
meaning of illegible not commonly intelligible characters, of foreign, obsolete,
characters, &c. technical, local, and provincial expressions, of abbreviations,
and of words used in a peculiar manner.
Illustration
A., a sculptor, agrees to sell to B 'All my mods'. A has both
models and modeling tools. Evidence may be given to
show which he meant to sell.
Who may give
evidence of 99. Persons who are not parties to a document, or their
agreement varying representatives in interest, may give evidence of any facts
terms of document. tending to show a contemporaneous agreement, varying
the terms of the document.
Illustration
A and B make a contract in writing that B shall sell A certain
cotton, to be paid for on delivery. At the same time they
make an oral agreement that three months credit shall be
given to A. This could not be shown as between A and B,
but it might be shown by C if it affected his interests.
CHAPTER VIII
ENGLISH LAW OF EVIDENCE WHEN IN FORCE
What questions to 100. Whenever in a judicial proceeding a question of evidence
be determined arises not provided for by this Ordinance or by any other
according to law in force in Sri Lanka, such question shall be determined
English Law of in accordance with the English Law of Evidence for the
Evidence. time being.
[18, 6 of 2021]
PART III
PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER IX
OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
Burden of proof. 101. Whoever desires any court to give judgment as to any
legal right or liability dependent on the existence of facts
which he asserts, must prove that those facts exist.
When a person is bound to prove the existence of any
fact, it is said that the burden of proof lies on that person.
Illustrations
(a) A desires a court to give judgment that B shall be
punished for a crime which A says B has committed. A
must prove that B has committed the crime.
(b)A desires a court to give judgment that he is entitled to
certain land in the possession of B by reason of facts
which he asserts, and which B denies to be true. A must
prove the existence of those facts.
PART III
PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER IX
OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
On whom burden 102. The burden of proof in a suit or proceeding lies on that
of proof lies. person who would fail if no evidence at all were given on
either side.
Illustrations
(a)A sues B for land of which B is in possession, and
which, A asserts, was left to A by the will of C, B's
father. If no evidence were given on either side, B
would be entitled to retain his possession. Therefore
the burden of proof is on A.
(b) A sues B for money due on a bond. The execution
of the bond is admitted, but B says that it was obtained
by fraud, which A denies. If no evidence were given
on either side, A would succeed, as the bond is not
disputed, and the fraud is not proved. Therefore the
burden of proof is on B.
Burden of proof as 103. The burden of proof as to any particular fact lies on that
to particular fact. person who wishes the court to believe in its existence,
unless it is provided by any law that the proof of that fact
shall lie on any particular person.
Illustration
A prosecutes B for theft, and wishes the court to believe
that B admitted the theft to C. A must prove the
admission. B wishes the court to believe that at the time
in question, he was elsewhere. He must prove it.
Burden of proving 104. The burden of proving any fact necessary to be proved in
fact necessary to be order to enable any person to give evidence of any other
proved to make fact is on the person who wishes to give such evidence.
evidence
Illustrations
admissible.
(a) A wishes to prove a dying declaration by B. A
must prove B' death.
(b) A wishes to prove, by secondary evidence, the
contents of a lost document. A must prove that the
document has been lost.
Burden of proving 105. When a person is accused of any offence, the burden of
that case of proving the existence of circumstances bringing the case
accused comes within any of the general exceptions in the Penal Code, or
within exceptions. within any special exception or proviso contained in any
other part of the same Code, or in any law defining the
offence, is upon him, and the Court shall presume the
absence of such circumstances.
Illustrations
(a) A, accused of murder, alleges that, by reason of
unsoundness of mind, he did not know the nature of
the act. The burden of the proof is on A.
(b) A, accused of murder, alleges that, by grave and
sudden provocation, he was deprived of the power of
self-control. The burden of proof is on A.
(c) Section 316 of the Penal Code provides that
whoever, except in the case provided for by section
326, voluntarily causes grievous hurt shall be subject
to certain punishments.
A is charged with voluntarily causing grievous hurt
under section 316.
The burden of proving the circumstances bringing
the case under section 326 lies on A.
Burden of proving 106. When any facts is especially within the knowledge of any
fact especially person, the burden of proving that fact is upon him
within knowledge
Illustrations
of any person.
(a) When a person does an act with some intention
other than that which the character and circumstances
of the act suggest, the burden of proving that
intention is upon him.
(b) A is charged with traveling on a railway without a
ticket. The burden of proving that he had a ticket is
on him.
Burden of 107
.
proving death of
person known to
have been alive
within thirty
years.
Burden of 108
proving .
that person is
alive
who has not been
heard of for one
year.
[2, 10 of 1988]
When the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and
it is shown that he was alive within thirty years, the
burden of proving that he is dead is on the person who
affirms it.
Provided that when the question is whether a man is alive or
dead, and it is proved that he has not been heard of for one
year by those who would naturally have heard of him if he
had been alive, the burden of proving that he is alive is
shifted to the person who affirms it.
Burden of proof as 109. When the question is whether persons are partners,
to partnership, landlord and tenant, or principal and agent, and it has
tenancy, and been shown that they have been acting as such, the
agency. burden of proving that they do not stand, or have ceased
to stand, to each other in those relationships respectively
is on the person who affirms it.
Burden of proof as 110. When the question is whether any person is owner of
to ownership. anything of which he is shown to be in possession, the
burden of proving that he is not the owner is on the
person who affirms that he is not the owner.
Proof of good faith 111. Where there is a question as to the good faith of a
in transactions transaction between parties, one of whom stands to the
where one party is other in a position of active confidence, the burden of
in position of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the party who
active confidence. is in a position of active confidence.
[19, 6 of 2021]
Illustrations
(a) The good faith of a sale by a client to an attorney-at-
law is in question in a suit brought by the client. The
burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on
the attorney-at-law.
(b) The good faith of a sale by a son just come of age to a
father is in question in a suit brought by the son. The
burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on
the father.
Birth during 112. The fact that any person was born during the continuance
marriage conclusive of a valid marriage between his mother and any man, or
proof of legitimacy. within two hundred and eighty days after its dissolution,
the mother remaining unmarried, shall be conclusive
proof that such person is the legitimate son of that man,
unless it can be shown that that man had no access to the
mother at any time when such person could have been
begotten or that he was impotent.
Presumption that a
boy under twelve 113. It shall be an irrebuttable presumption of the law that a
years cannot rape. boy under the age of twelve years is incapable of
committing rape.
Court may 114. The court may presume the existence of any fact which it
presume existence thinks likely to have happened, regard being had to the
of certain facts. common course of natural events, human conduct, and
public and private business in their relation to the facts of
the particular case.
Illustrations
The Court may presume- (a) that a man who is in
possession of stolen goods soon after the theft is either
the thief or has received the goods knowing them to be
stolen, unless he can account for his possession;
(b) that an accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless he
is corroborated in material particulars;
(c) that a thing or state of things which has been
shown to be in existence within a period shorter than
that within which such thing or state of things
usually ceases to exist is still in existence;
(d) the judicial and official acts have been regularly
performed;
(e) that the common course of business has been
followed in particular cases;
(f) that evidence which could be and is not produced
would if produced, be unfavourable to the person
who withholds it;
(g) that if a man refuses to answer a question which he
is not compelled to answer by law, the answer, if
given, would be unfavourable to him;
(h) that when a document creating an obligation is in
the hands of the obligor, the obligation has been
discharged.
But the Court shall also have regard to such facts as
the following in considering whether such maxims
do or do not apply to the particular case before it:-
as to illustration (a) - A shopkeeper has in his
till a marked rupee soon after it was stolen, and
cannot account for its possession specifically, but
is continually receiving rupees in the course of
his business.
as to illustration (b) - A, a person of the highest
character, is tried for causing a man's death by
an act of negligence in arranging certain
machinery. B, a person of equally good character,
who also took part in the arrangement,
describes precisely what was done, and admits
and explains the common carelessness of A and
himself.
as to illustration (b) - a crime is committed by
several persons. A, B, and C, three of the
criminals, are captured on the spot and kept
apart from each other. Each gives an account of
the crime implicating D, and the accounts
corroborate each other in such a manner as to
render previous concert highly improbable.
as to illustration - It is proved that a river ran in
a certain course five years ago, but it is known
that there have been floods since that time
which might change its course.
as to illustration (d) - a judicial act, the
regularity of which is in question, was
performed under exceptional circumstances.
as to illustration (e) - the question is, whether a
letter was received. It is shown to have been
posted, but the usual course of the post was
interrupted by disturbances.
as to illustration (f) - a man refuses to produce a
document which would bear on a contract of
small importance on which he is sued, but
which might also injure the feelings and
reputation of his family.
as to illustration (g) - a man refuses to answer a
question which he is not compelled by law to
answer, but the answer to it might cause loss to
him in matters unconnected with the matter in
relation to which it is asked.
as to illustration (h) - a bond is in possession of
the obligor, but the circumstances of the case
are such that he may have stolen it.
CHAPTER X
ESTOPPEL
Estoppel. 115. When one person has by his declaration, act, or omission
intentionally caused or permitted another person to
believe a thing to be true and to act upon such belief,
neither he nor his representative shall be allowed in any
suit or proceeding between himself and such person or his
representative to deny the truth of that thing.
Illustrations
A intentionally and falsely leads B to believe that a
certain land belongs to A, and thereby induces B to buy and
pay for it.
The land afterwards becomes the property of A, and A seeks
to set aside the sale, on the ground that at the time of the
sale he had no title. He must not be allowed to prove
his want of title.
Estoppel of tenant 116. No tenant of immovable property, or person claiming
through such tenant, shall during the continuance of the
tenancy, be permitted to deny that the landlord of such
tenant had, at the beginning of the tenancy, a title to
such immovable property; and
no person who came upon any immovable property by the
and of
licence of the person in possession thereof shall be
licensee of
permitted to deny that such person had a title to such
person in
possession at the time when such licence was given.
possession.
Estoppel of bailee, 117. No bailee, agent, or licensee shall be permitted to deny
&c. that the bailor, principal, or licensor, by whom any goods
were entrusted to any of them respectively, was entitled to
those goods at the time when they were so entrusted:
Provided that any such bailee, agent, or licensee may
show that he was compelled to deliver up any such goods to
some person who had a right to them as against his bailor,
principal, or licensor, or that his bailor, principal,
or licensor wrongfully, and without notice to the bailee,
agent, or licensee, obtained the goods from a third person,
who has claimed them from such bailee, agent, or
licensee.
CHAPTER XI
OF WITNESSES
Who may testify. 118. All persons shall be competent to testify unless the Court
considers that they are prevented from understanding the
questions put to them, or from giving rational answers to
those questions, by tender years, extreme old age, disease,
whether of body or mind, or any other cause of the same
kind.
Explanation
A person of unsound mind is not incompetent to testify
unless he is prevented by his unsoundness of mind from
understanding the questions put to him and giving rational
answers to them.
Dumb witnesses. 119. A witness who is unable to speak may give his evidence
in any other manner in which he can make it intelligible,
as by writing or by signs; but such writing must be
written and the signs made in open court. Evidence so
given shall be deemed to be oral evidence.
Competent 120. (1) In all civil proceedings the parties in the suit and
witnesses. the husband or wife of any party to the suit shall be
competent witnesses.
(2) In criminal proceedings against any person the
husband or wife of such person respectively shall be
a competent witness if called by the accused, but in
that case all communications between them shall
cease to be privileged.
(3) In criminal proceedings against a husband or wife
for any bodily injury or violence inflicted on his or
her wife or husband, such wife or husband
shall be a competent and compellable witness.
(4) In criminal proceedings against a husband or wife
for any attempt to cause any bodily injury or violence
on his or her wife or husband, such wife or husband
shall be a competent witness for the prosecution.
(5) In criminal proceedings against a husband or wife
for an offence punishable under section 362B or
362C of the Penal Code, the wife or husband of the
accused shall be a competent witness for the
prosecution.
(6) In criminal trials the accused shall be a
competent witness in his own behalf, and may give
evidence in the same manner and with the like effect
and consequences as any other witness, provided
that, so far as the cross-examination relates to the
credit of the accused, the court may limit the cross-
examination to such extent as it thinks proper,
although the proposed cross-examination might be
permissible in the case of any other witness.
Judges and 121. No Judge or Magistrate shall, except upon special order
Magistrates. of a Judge of a superior Court, be compelled to answer
any questions as to his own conduct in Court as such
Judge or Magistrate, or as to anything which came to his
knowledge in court as such Judge or Magistrate; but he
may be examined as to other matters which occurred in
his presence while he was so acting.
Illustrations
(a) A, on his trial before the Supreme Court says that a
deposition was improperly taken by B, the Magistrate.
B cannot be compelled to answer questions as to this,
except upon the special order of the Judge.
(b) A is accused before the District Court of having
given false evidence before B, a Magistrate. B
cannot be asked what A said, except upon the special
order of the District Judge.
(c) A is accused before the Supreme Court of
attempting to murder a police officer whilst on his trial
before B, a District Judge. B may be examined as to
what occurred.
Communications 122. No person who is or has been married shall be compelled to
during marriage. disclose any communication made to him during marriage
by any person to whom he is or has been married, nor
shall he be permitted to disclose any such communication
unless the person who made it, or his representative in
interest, consents, except in suits between married
persons, or proceedings in which one married person is
prosecuted for any crime committed against the other and
except in cases mentioned in section 120 (2).
No one shall be permitted to produce any unpublished
Evidence as to 123. official records relating to any affairs of State, or to give
affairs of State. any evidence derived therefrom, except with the permission
of the officer at the head of the department concerned, who
shall give or withhold such permission as he thinks fit,
subject, however, to the control of the Minister.
No public officer shall be compelled to disclose
communications made to him in official confidence when
Official 124. he considers that the public interests would suffer by the
communications. disclosure.
No Magistrate or Police Officer shall be compelled to say
whence he got the information as to the commission of
Information as to 125. any offence, and no revenue officer shall be compelled to
commission of say whence he got any information as to the commission
offences. of any offence against the public revenue or the excise laws.
Explanation
'Revenue Officer' in this section means any officer
employed in or about the business of any branch of the
public revenue, or in or about the business of any
Government Farm.
Professional 126. (1) No attorney-at-law, or notary shall at any time be
communications. permitted, unless with his client's express consent, to
[20, 6 of 2021] disclose any communication made to him in the course
and for the purpose of his employment as such attorney-
at-law, or notary by or on behalf of his client, or to state
the contents or conditions of any document with which he
has become acquainted in the course and for the purpose
of his professional employment, or to disclose any advice
given by him to his client in the course of and for the
purpose of such employment:
Provided that nothing in this section shall protect from
disclosure -
(a) any such communication made in
furtherance of any illegal purpose;
(b) any fact observed by any attorney-at-law, or
notary in the course of his employment as such,
showing that any crime or fraud has been
committed since the commencement of his
employment.
(2) It is immaterial whether the attention of such attorney-
at-law, or notary was or was not directed to such fact
by or on behalf of his client.
Explanation
- The obligations stated in this section continues after the
employment has ceased.
Illustrations
(a) A, a client says to B, a proctor, 'I have committed
forgery, and I wish you to defend me.' As the defence of a
man known to be guilty is not a criminal purpose, this
communication is protected from disclosure.
(b) A, a client, says to B, a proctor, 'I wish to obtain
possession of property by the use of a forged deed, on
which I request you to sue'. This communication, being
made in furtherance of a criminal purpose, is not
protected from disclosure.
(c) A, being charged with embezzlement, retains B, a
proctor, to defend him. In the course of the proceedings B
observes that an entry has been made in A's account book
charging A with the sum said to have been embezzled,
which entry was not in the book at the commencement
of
his employment. This being a fact observed by B in the
course of his employment, showing that a fraud has been
committed since the commencement of the proceedings,
it is not protected from disclosure.
Section 126 to 127.
apply to clerks, and
servants of
The provisions of section 126 shall apply to interpreters and
advocates, proctors,
the clerks or servants of attorneys-at-law, and notaries.
and notaries.
[21, 6 of 2021]
Privilege not
If any party to a suit gives evidence therein at his own
waived by 128.
instance or otherwise, he shall not be deemed to have
volunteering
consented thereby to such disclosure as is mentioned in
evidence.
section 126, and if any party to a suit or proceeding calls
[22, 6 of 2021]
any such attorney-at-law, or notary as a witness. He shall be
deemed to have consented to such disclosure only if he
questions such advocate, proctor, or notary on matters
which but for such questions, he would not be at liberty to
disclose.
Confidential
No one shall be compelled to disclose to the court any
communications 129.
confidential communication which has taken place between
with legal advisers.
him and his legal professional adviser, unless he offers
himself as a witness, in which case he may be compelled to
disclose any such communications as may appear to the
court necessary to be known in order to explain any
evidence which he has given, but no others.
Production of
(1) No witness who is not party to a suit shall be
witness' title deeds. 130. compelled to produce his title deeds to any property,
or any document in virtue of which he holds any
property as pledgee or mortgagee, or any document
the production of which might lead to criminate him,
unless he has agreed in writing to produce them with
the person seeking the production of such deeds or
some person through whom he claims. By a party to
the suit
(2) No witness who is a party to the suit shall be
bound to produce any document in his possession or
power which is not relevant or material to the case
of the party requiring its production.
Bankers’ book
(3) No bank shall be compelled to produce the books
of such bank in any legal proceeding to which such
bank is not a party, except as provided by section 90D.
Who may not be 131. No one shall be compelled to produce documents in his
compelled to possession which any other person would be entitled to
produce refuse to produce if they were in his possession (except
documents. for the purpose of identification), unless such last-
mentioned person consents to their production, nor shall any
one who is entitled to refuse to produce a document be
compelled to give oral evidence of its contents.
Witness not 132. (1)A witness shall not be excused from answering
excused from any question as to any matter relevant to the matter
answering on in issue in any suit or in any civil or criminal
ground that answer proceeding upon the ground that the answer to
will criminate. [23, such question will criminate or may tend
6 of 2021] directly or indirectly to criminate such witness, or
that it will expose or tend directly or indirectly to
expose such witness to a penalty or forfeiture of
any kind, or that it will establish or tend to
establish that he owes a debt, or is otherwise
subject to a civil suit at the instance of the State
or of any other person.
Not liable
(2) No answer which a witness shall be compelled
for
by the Court to give shall subject him to any arrest
prosecution
or prosecution, or to be proved against him in any
for such
criminal proceeding, except a prosecution for
answer
giving false evidence by such answer. Court shall
explain subsection (2).
(3) Before compelling a witness to answer a
question the answer to which will criminate or
may tend directly or indirectly to criminate such
witness, the court shall explain to the witness the
purport of the last preceding subsection.
Accomplice. 133. An accomplice shall be a competent witness against an
accused person, and a conviction is not illegal merely
because it proceeds upon the uncorroborated testimony of
an accomplice.
Number of 134. No particular number of witnesses shall in any case be
witnesses. required for the proof of any fact.
CHAPTER XII
OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
Order of 135. The order in which witnesses are produced and examined
production and shall be regulated by the law and practice for the time being
examination of relating to civil and criminal procedure respectively and, in
witnesses the absence of any such law, by the discretion of the Court.
(1) When either party proposes to give evidence of
Judge to decide as 136. any fact, the Judge may ask the party proposing to
to admissibility of give the evidence in what manner the alleged fact, if
evidence. proved, would be relevant; and the Judge shall admit
the evidence if he thinks that the fact, if proved, would
be relevant, and not otherwise.
(2) If the fact proposed to be proved is one of which
evidence is admissible only upon proof of some
other fact, such last mentioned fact must be proved
before evidence is given of the fact first mentioned,
unless the party undertakes to give proof of such
fact, and the Court is satisfied with such undertaking.
(3) If the relevancy of one alleged fact depends upon
another alleged fact being first proved, the Judge
may in his discretion either permit evidence of the first
fact to be given before the second fact is proved, or
require evidence to be given of the second fact before
evidence is given of the first fact.
Illustrations
(a) It is proposed to prove a statement about a
relevant fact by a person alleged to be dead,
which statement is relevant under section 32. The
fact that the person is dead must be proved by the
person proposing to prove the statement before
evidence is given of the statement.
(b) It is proposed to prove by a copy the
contents of a document said to be lost. The fact
that the original is lost must be proved by the
person proposing to produce the copy before
the copy is produced.
(c) A is accused of receiving stolen property
knowing it to have been stolen. It is proposed to
prove that he denied the possession of the
property. The relevancy of the denial depends
on the identity of the property. The Court may
in its discretion either require the property to be
identified before the denial of the possession is
proved, or permit the denial of the possession to
be proved before the property is identified.
(d) It is proposed to prove a fact (a) which is said
to have been the cause or effect of a fact in issue.
There are several intermediate facts, (b), (c), and
(d), which must be shown to exist before the
fact (a) can be regarded as the cause or effect of
the fact in issue. The Court may either permit (a)
to be proved before (b), (c), or
(d) is proved, or may require proof of (a), (b), (c),
and (d) before permitting proof of (a).
Examination-in- 137. (1) The examination of a witness by the party who
chief. calls him shall be called his examination-in-
chief.
(2) The examination of a witness by the adverse
Cross-
party shall be called his cross-examination.
examination.
(3) The examination of a witness subsequent to the
Re-
cross-examination by the party who called him,
examination.
shall be called his re-examination.
Order of 138. (1) Witness shall be first examined-in-chief, then
examination. (if the adverse party so desires) cross-
examined,
then (if the party calling him so desires) re-
examined.
(2) The examination and cross-examination must
Examination
relate to relevant facts, but the cross-examination
and cross-
need not be confined to the facts to which the
examination.
witness testified on his examination-in-chief.
(3) The re-examination shall be directed to the
Re-
explanation of matters referred to in cross-
examination.
examination and if new matter is, by permission
of the Court, introduced in re-examination, the
adverse party may further cross-examine upon
that matter.
(4) The Court may in all cases permit a witness to
Further
be recalled either for further examination-in-chief
examination
or for further cross-examination, and if it does so
and cross-
the parties have the right of further cross-
examination.
examination and re-examination respectively.
Cross-examination 139. A person summoned to produce a document does not
of person called to become a witness by the mere fact that he produces it,
produce a and cannot be cross-examined unless and until he is
document. called as a witness.
Witnesses to 140. Witnesses to character may be cross-examined and re-
character. examined.
Leading questions. 141. Any question suggesting the answer which the person
putting it wishes or expects to receive is called a leading
question.
When leading 142. Leading questions must not, if objected to by the adverse
questions must not party, be asked in an examination-in-chief or in a re-
be asked. examination, except with the permission of the Court.
When leading 143. (1) Leading questions may be asked in cross
questions may be examinations, subject to the following qualifications
asked in cross- :- (a) the question must not put into the mouth of the
examination. witness the very words which he is to echo back again
; and (b) the question must not assume that facts have
been proved (c) which have not been
proved, or that particular answers have been given
contrary to the fact.
(2) The Court in its discretion may prohibit leading
Court
questions from being put to a witness who shows a
may
strong interest or bias in favor of the cross-
prohibit
examination party.
leading
question.
Evidence as to 144. Any witness may be asked, whilst under examination
matters in writing. whether any contract, grant, or other disposition of property
as to which he is giving evidence, was not contained in a
document, and if he says that it was, or if he is about to
make any statement as to the contents of any document
which, in the opinion of the court, ought to be produced,
the adverse party may object to such evidence being
given until such document is produced, or until facts have
been proved which entitle the party who called the witness
to give secondary evidence of it.
Explanation
A witness may give oral evidence of statements made by
other persons about the contents of documents if such
statements are in themselves relevant facts.
Illustration
The question is whether A assaulted B, C. deposes that he
heard A say to D, 'B wrote a letter accusing me of theft,
and I will be revenged on him:. This statement is relevant as
showing A' motive for the assault, and evidence may be
given of it, though no other evidence is given about the
letter.
Cross-examination 145. (1)A witness may be cross-examined as to previous
as to previous statements made by him in writing or reduced into
statements in writing and relevant to matters in question without
writing. such writing being shown to him, or being proved;
but if it is intended to contradict him by the writing,
his attention must, before the writing can be proved,
be called to those parts of it which are to be used for
the purpose of contradicting him.
(2) If a witness, upon cross-examination as to a
As to
previous oral statement made by him relevant
proof of
to
previous matters in question in the suit or proceeding in
statement. which he is cross-examined and inconsistent with
his present testimony, does not distinctly admit that he
made such statement, proof may be given that he did
in fact make it; but before such proof can be given
the circumstances of the supposed statement
sufficient to designate the particular occasion must
be mentioned to the witness, and he must be asked
whether or not he made such a statement.
Questions lawful in 146. When a witness is cross-examined, he may, in addition to
cross-examination. the questions herein before referred to, be asked any
questions which tend-
(a) to test his accuracy, veracity, or credibility;
(b) to discover who he is, and what is his position in
life; or
(c) to shake his credit, by injuring his character;
When witness to be 147. If any such question relates to a matter relevant to the suit
compelled to or proceeding, the provisions of section 132 shall apply
answer. thereto.
Court to decide 148. (1)If any such question relates to a matter not relevant to
when witness shall the suit or proceeding, except in so far as it affects the
be compelled to credit of the witness by injuring his character, the court
answer. shall decide whether or not the witness shall be
compelled to answer it, and may, if it thinks fit, warn the
witness that he is not obliged to answer it.
(2) In exercising its discretion, the court shall have regard
to the following considerations:
(a) such questions are proper if they are of such a
nature that the truth of the imputation conveyed by
them would seriously affect the opinion of the court as
to the credibility of the witness on the matter to which
he testifies;
(b) such questions are improper if the imputation
which they convey relates to matters so remote in
time, or of such a character that the truth of the
imputation would not affect, or would affect in a slight
degree, the opinion of the court as to the
credibility of the witness on the matter to which he
testifies;
(c) such questions are improper if there is a great
disproportion between the importance of the
imputation made against the witness' character and the
importance of his evidence;
(d) the court may, if it sees fit, draw from the witness'
refusal to answer the inference that the answer if
given would be unfavourable.
Question not to be 149. No such question as is referred to in section 148 ought to
asked without be asked unless the person asking it has reasonable
reasonable grounds for thinking that the imputation which it conveys
grounds. is well founded.
[24, 6 of 2021]
Illustrations
(a) An attorney-at-law is instructed that an important
witness is a thief. This is a reasonable ground for
asking the witness whether he is a thief.
(b) An Attorney-at-law is informed by a person in
court that an important witness is a professional
gambler. The informant, on being questioned by the
Attorney-at-Law, gives satisfactory reasons for his
statement. This is a reasonable ground for asking the
witness whether he is a professional gambler.
(c) A witness, of whom nothing whatever is known,
is asked at random whether he is a thief. There are here
no reasonable grounds for the question.
(d) A witness of whom nothing whatever is known,
being questioned as to his mode of life and means of
living, gives unsatisfactory answers. This may be a
reasonable ground for asking if he is a professional
gambler.
Procedure of court 150.
If the court is of opinion that any such question was asked
in case of question
without reasonable grounds, it may, if it was asked by any
being asked
attorney-at-law, report the circumstances of the case to the
without reasonable
Supreme Court or other authority to which such attorney- at-
grounds.
law is subject in the exercise of his profession.
[25, 6 of 2021]
Indecent and 151. The court may forbid any questions or inquiries which it
scandalous regards as indecent or scandalous, although such
questions. questions or inquiries may have some bearing on the
questions before the court, unless they relate to facts in
issue, or to matters necessary to be known in order to
determine whether or not the facts in issue existed.
Questions intended 152. The court shall forbid any question which appears to it to be
to insult or annoy. intended to insult or annoy, or which, though proper in
itself, appears to the court needlessly offensive in form.
Exclusion of 153. When a witness has been asked and has answered any
evidence to question which is relevant to the inquiry only in so far as
contradict answers it tends to shake his credit by injuring his character, no
to questions testing evidence shall be given to contradict him; but if he
veracity. answers falsely, he may afterwards be charged with
giving false evidence.
Exception 1
If a witness is asked whether he has been previously
convicted of any crime and denies it, evidence may
be given of his previous conviction.
Exception 2
If a witness is asked any question intending to
impeach his impartiality, and answers it by denying
the fact suggested, he may be contradicted.
Illustrations
(a) A claim against an underwriter is resisted on the
ground of fraud. The claimant is asked whether, in a
former transaction, he had not made a fraudulent
claim. He denies it. Evidence is offered to show that
he did not make such a claim. The evidence is
inadmissible.
(b) A witness is asked whether he was not dismissed
from a situation for dishonesty, he denies it.
Evidence is offered to show that he was dismissed
for dishonesty. The evidence is not admissible.
(c)A affirms that on a certain day he saw B at Jaffna.
A is asked whether he himself was not on that day at
Colombo. He denies it. Evidence is offered to show
that A was on that date at Colombo. The evidence is
admissible, not as contradicting A on a fact which
affects his credit, but as contradicting the alleged
fact that B was seen on the day in question in Jaffna.
In each of these cases the witness might, if his denial
was false, be charged with giving false evidence.
(d) A is tried for a rape on B, B is asked in cross-
examination whether she has not had illicit intercourse
with C and D. She denies it. Evidence is offered to
show that she has had such intercourse with C and
D. The evidence is not admissible.
(e) A is asked whether he has not said that he would be
revenged on B, against whom he gives evidence. He
denies it. He may be contradicted on the ground that
the question tends to impeach his impartiality.
Question by party 154. The court may in its discretion permit the person who
to his own witness. calls a witness to put any question to him which might be
put in cross-examination by the adverse party.
Impeaching credit 155. The credit of a witness may be impeached in the
of witness. following ways by the adverse party or, with the consent
of the court, by the party who calls him :-
(a) by the evidence of persons who testify that they,
from their knowledge of the witness, believe him to
be unworthy of credit ;
(b) by the proof that the witness has been bribed or has
accepted the offer of a bribe, or has received any other
corrupt inducement to give his evidence ;
(c) by proof of former statements inconsistent with
any part of his evidence which is liable to be
contradicted ;
(d) when a man is prosecuted for rape or an attempt
to ravish, it may be shown that the prosecutrix was of
generally immoral character.
Explanation
A witness declaring another witness to be unworthy of
credit may not, upon his examination-in-chief give
reasons for his belief, but he may be asked his reasons in
cross-examination, and the answers which he gives cannot
be contradicted, though, if they are false, he may afterwards
be charged with giving false evidence.
Illustrations
(a) A sues B for the price of goods sold and delivered to
B. C says that he delivered the goods to B. Evidence is
offered to show that, on a previous occasion, he said that
he had not delivered the goods to B. The evidence is
admissible.
(b) A is indicted for the murder of B. C says that B, when
dying, declared that A had given B the wound of which he
died. Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous
occasion, C said that the wound was not given by A or in his
presence. The evidence is admissible.
Questions tending 156. When a witness whom it is intended to corroborate gives
to corroborate evidence of any relevant fact, he may be questioned as to
evidence of any other circumstances which he observed at or near to the
relevant fact time or place at which such relevant fact occurred. If the
admissible. court is of opinion that such circumstances, if proved,
would corroborate the testimony of the witness as to the
relevant fact which he testifies.
Illustrations
A, an accomplice, gives an account of a robbery in which
he took part. He describes various incidents unconnected
with the robbery which occurred on his way to and from the
place it was committed.
Independent evidence of these facts may be given in order
to corroborate his evidence as to the robbery itself.
Former statement 157.
In order to corroborate the testimony of a witness, any
of witness may be
former statement made by such witness, whether written
proved to
or verbal, relating to the same fact at or about the time
corroborate later
when the fact took place or before any authority legally
testimony as to
competent to investigate the fact, may be proved.
same facts.
What matters may 158. Whatever any statement relevant under section 32 or 33 is
be proved in proved, all matters may be proved either in order to
[TRUNCATED: processed first 80 of 85 pages]